http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

C H A P T E R

11

The Abdomen
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (Vol. 13: Abdomen)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com

Anatomy and Physiology
Visualize or palpate the bony landmarks of the abdominal wall and pelvis, as
shown in Figure 11-1: the xiphoid process, iliac crest, anterior superior iliac spine,
pubic tubercle, and symphysis pubis. The rectus abdominis muscles become more
prominent when the patient raises the head and shoulders or lifts the legs from
the supine position.

Xiphoid process

Rectus abdominis
muscle

Costal margin
Midline, overlying
linea alba

Umbilicus

Iliac crest
Anterior superior
iliac spine

Inguinal ligament
Pubic tubercle

Symphysis pubis

FIGURE 11-1.

Landmarks of the abdomen.

C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

449

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
For descriptive purposes, the
abdomen is often divided by
imaginary lines crossing at the
umbilicus, forming the right
upper, right lower, left upper, and
left lower quadrants (Fig. 11-2).
Another system divides the abdomen into nine sections. Terms for
three of them are commonly used:
epigastric, umbilical, and hypogastric or suprapubic (Fig. 11-3).
The abdomen, or the abdominopelvic
cavity, lies between the thoracic diaphragm and the pelvic diaphragm
and contains two continuous cavities,
the abdominal cavity and the pelvic
cavity, enclosed by a ﬂexible multilayered wall of muscles and sheet-like
tendons. This extended cavity houses
most of the digestive organs, the
spleen, and parts of the urogenital
system (Fig. 11-4). Lining this cavity
and folding over viscera such as the
stomach and intestines are the parietal and visceral peritoneum.
Examine the abdomen, moving in a
clockwise rotation; several organs
are often palpable. Exceptions are
the stomach and much of the liver
and spleen which lie high in the
abdominal cavity close to the diaphragm, where they are protected
by the thoracic ribs beyond the
reach of the palpating hand. The
dome of the diaphragm lies at about
the ﬁfth anterior intercostal space.

Epigastric
RUQ

LUQ
Umbilical

RLQ

LLQ

F I G U R E 1 1 - 2 . Quadrants of the
abdomen.

Hypogastric
or
suprapubic

FIGURE 11-3.
abdomen.

Xiphoid
process
Spleen

Liver

Stomach

Gallbladder

Aorta

Lower pole of
right kidney

Pancreas

Duodenum

Transverse colon

Ascending colon

Descending and
sigmoid colon

Cecum
Iliac artery
Full bladder

FIGURE 11-4.

Abdominal viscera.

Abdominal Structures by Quadrant
Right upper quadrant
Left upper quadrant
Left lower quadrant
Right lower quadrant

450

Sections of the

Liver, gallbladder, pylorus, duodenum, hepatic
ﬂexure of colon, and head of pancreas
Spleen, splenic ﬂexure of colon, stomach, body
and tail of pancreas, and transverse colon
Sigmoid colon, descending colon, left ovary
Cecum, appendix, ascending colon, right ovary

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
■ In the right upper quadrant (RUQ), the soft consistency of the liver makes

it difﬁcult to palpate through the abdominal wall. The lower margin of the
liver, the liver edge, is often palpable at the right costal margin. The gallbladder, which rests against the inferior surface of the liver, and the more
deeply lying duodenum are generally not palpable. Moving medially, the
examiner encounters the rib cage with its xiphoid process, which protects
the stomach. The abdominal aorta often has visible pulsations and is usually palpable in the upper abdomen, or epigastrium. At a deeper level, the
lower pole of the right kidney and the tip of the 12th ﬂoating rib may be
palpable, especially in children and thin individuals with relaxed abdominal muscles.
■ In the left upper quadrant (LUQ), the spleen is lateral to and behind the stom-

ach, just above the left kidney in the left midaxillary line. Its upper margin
rests against the dome of the diaphragm. The 9th, 10th, and 11th ribs protect
most of the spleen. The tip of the spleen may be palpable below the left costal margin in a small percentage of adults (in contrast to readily palpable
splenic enlargement, or splenomegaly). In healthy people the pancreas cannot
be detected.
■ In the left lower quadrant (LLQ), you can often palpate the ﬁrm, narrow, tu-

bular sigmoid colon. Portions of the transverse and descending colon may
also be palpable, especially if stool is present. In the lower midline are the
bladder, the sacral promontory consisting of the bony anterior edge of the S1
vertebra (sometimes mistaken for a tumor), and, in women, the uterus and
ovaries.
■ In the right lower quadrant (RLQ) are bowel loops and the appendix at the base

of the cecum near the junction of the small and large intestines. In healthy
people, these are not palpable.
The kidneys are retroperitoneal (posterior) organs. The ribs protect their
upper poles (Fig. 11-5). The costovertebral angle (CVA), formed by the lower
border of the 12th rib and the transverse processes of the upper lumbar
vertebrae, deﬁnes where to examine for
kidney tenderness, called costovertebral angle tenderness (CVAT).
Continuous with the abdominal cavity,
but angulated posteriorly, lies the funnel-shaped pelvic cavity, which contains
the terminal ureters, bladder, pelvic
genital organs, and, at times, loops of
small and large intestine. These organs
are partially protected by the surrounding pelvis.

11th rib
12th rib
Kidney

Costovertebral
angle

FIGURE 11-5.

Kidneys and costovertebral angle.

C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

451

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

The bladder is a hollow reservoir with strong smooth muscle walls composed
chieﬂy of detrusor muscle. It accommodates roughly 400 to 500 mL of urine ﬁltered by the kidneys into the renal pelvis and the ureters. Bladder expansion
stimulates parasympathetic innervation at relatively low pressures, resulting in
detrusor contraction and inhibition (relaxation) of the internal urethral sphincter,
also under autonomic control. Voiding further requires relaxation of the external
urethral sphincter, composed of striated muscle under voluntary control. Rising
pressure triggers the conscious urge to void, but can be overcome by increased
intraurethral pressure that prevents incontinence. Intraurethral pressure is
related to smooth muscle tone in the internal urethral sphincter, the thickness of
the urethral mucosa, and, in women, sufﬁcient support to the bladder and proximal urethra from pelvic muscles and ligaments to maintain proper anatomical
relationships. Striated muscle around the urethra can also contract voluntarily to
interrupt voiding (Fig. 11-6).

A distended bladder may be palpable
above the symphysis pubis.

Uterus

Bladder
Detrusor
muscle
Internal
urethral
sphincter
External
urethral
sphincter

Urethra

Vagina

FIGURE 11-6.

Rectum

Pelvic anatomy.

Neuroregulatory control of the bladder functions at several levels. In infants, the
bladder empties by reﬂex mechanisms in the sacral spinal cord. Voluntary control of the bladder depends on higher centers in the brain and motor and sensory pathways connecting the brain and the reﬂex arcs of the sacral spinal cord.
When voiding is inconvenient, higher centers in the brain can inhibit detrusor
contractions until the capacity of the bladder, approximately 400 to 500 mL, is
exceeded. The integrity of the sacral nerves that innervate the bladder can be
tested by assessing perirectal and perineal sensation in the S2, S3, and S4 dermatomes (see p. 764).

452

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY

The Health History
Common or Concerning Symptoms
Gastrointestinal Disorders

Urinary and Renal Disorders

Abdominal pain, acute and chronic
Indigestion, nausea, vomiting including blood (hematemesis), loss of
appetite (anorexia), early satiety
Diﬃculty swallowing (dysphagia) and/
or painful swallowing (odynophagia)
Change in bowel function
Diarrhea, constipation
Jaundice

Suprapubic pain
Diﬃculty urinating (dysuria), urgency,
or frequency
Hesitancy, decreased stream in males
Excessive urination (polyuria) or
excess urination at night (nocturia)
Urinary incontinence
Blood in the urine (hematuria)
Flank pain and ureteral colic

Gastrointestinal (GI) complaints rank high among reasons for ofﬁce and emergency
room visits. You will encounter a wide variety of upper GI symptoms, including
abdominal pain, heartburn, nausea and vomiting, difﬁculty or pain with swallowing, vomiting of stomach contents or blood, loss of appetite, and jaundice.
Abdominal pain alone accounted for more than 1.5 million outpatient visits and
11 million emergency room visits in 2011.1,2 Lower GI complaints are also common: diarrhea, constipation, change in bowel habits, and blood in the stool, often
described as either bright red or dark and tarry.
Numerous symptoms also originate in the genitourinary tract: difﬁculty urinating,
urgency and frequency, hesitancy and decreased stream in men, high urine volume, urinating at night, incontinence, blood in the urine, and ﬂank pain and
colic from renal stones or infection. These are often accompanied by GI symptoms such as abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting.
Your skills in history taking and examination, and clustering your ﬁndings, are
important determinants of sound clinical reasoning and an astute differential
diagnosis.

Patterns and Mechanisms of
Abdominal Pain
Before exploring common symptoms, review the mechanisms and clinical patterns of abdominal pain. There are three broad categories of abdominal pain:
■ Visceral pain occurs when hollow abdominal organs such as the intestine

or biliary tree contract unusually forcefully or are distended or stretched
(Fig. 11-7). Solid organs such as the liver can also become painful when their
capsules are stretched. Visceral pain may be difﬁcult to localize. It is typically
palpable near the midline at levels that vary according to the structure
involved, as illustrated on the next page. Ischemia also stimulates visceral
pain ﬁbers.

See Table 11-1, Abdominal Pain,
pp. 488–489.
Visceral pain in the RUQ suggests liver
distention against its capsule from the
various causes of hepatitis, including
alcoholic hepatitis.

C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

453

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY
Visceral pain varies in quality and may be gnawing, burning, cramping, or
aching. When it becomes severe, sweating, pallor, nausea, vomiting, and
restlessness may follow.

Visceral periumbilical pain suggests
early acute appendicitis from distention of an inflamed appendix. It gradually changes to parietal pain in the
RLQ from inflammation of the adjacent parietal peritoneum. For pain
disproportionate to physical findings,
suspect intestinal mesenteric ischemia.

Epigastric pain from
the stomach, duodenum,
or pancreas

Right upper quadrant or
epigastric pain from the
biliary tree and liver

Periumbilical pain
from the small
intestine, appendix,
or proximal colon

Suprapubic or sacral
pain from the rectum

Hypogastric pain
from the colon,
bladder, or uterus.
Colon pain may
be more diffuse
than illustrated.

FIGURE 11-7.

Types of visceral pain.

■ Parietal pain originates from inﬂammation of the parietal peritoneum, called

peritonitis. It is a steady, aching pain that is usually more severe than visceral
pain and more precisely localized over the involved structure. It is typically
aggravated by movement or coughing. Patients with parietal pain usually
prefer to lie still.
■ Referred pain is felt in more distant sites which are innervated at approxi-

mately the same spinal levels as the disordered structures. Referred pain
often develops as the initial pain becomes more intense and seems to radiate
or travel from the initial site. It may be palpated superﬁcially or deeply but
is usually localized.
Pain may also be referred to the abdomen from the chest, spine, or pelvis,
further complicating the assessment of abdominal pain.

454

In contrast to peritonitis, patients with
colicky pain from a renal stone move
around frequently trying to find a
comfortable position.

Pain of duodenal or pancreatic origin
may be referred to the back, pain
from the biliary tree, to the right
scapular region or the right posterior
thorax.
Pain from pleurisy or inferior wall myocardial infarction may be referred to
the epigastric area.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY

The Gastrointestinal Tract
Upper Abdominal Pain, Discomfort, and Heartburn. The prevalence
of recurrent upper abdominal discomfort or pain is approximately 25% in the
United States and other Western countries.3 In recent years, consensus statements
from expert societies have clariﬁed the deﬁnitions and classiﬁcation of numerous
abdominal symptoms, particularly the 2006 Rome III criteria for functional GI
disorders.4,5 Understanding carefully deﬁned terminology will help you identify
the patient’s underlying condition.

Studies suggest that neuropeptides
such as 5-hydroxytryptophan and
substance P mediate interconnected
symptoms of pain, bowel dysfunction,
and stress.4

Acute Upper Abdominal Pain or Discomfort. For patients with
abdominal pain, causes range from benign to life threatening, so take the time to
conduct a careful history.
■ First determine the timing of the pain. Is it acute or chronic? Acute abdominal

pain has many patterns. Did the pain start suddenly or gradually? When did
it begin? How long does it last? What is its pattern over a 24-hour period?
Over weeks or months? Is the illness acute, or chronic and recurring?

■ Ask patients to describe the pain in their own words. Pursue important details:

“Where does the pain start?” “Does it radiate or travel anywhere?” “What is
the pain like?” If the patient has trouble describing the pain, try offering
several choices: “Is it aching, burning, gnawing . . . ?”
■ Then ask the patient to point to the pain. Patients cannot always clearly

describe the location of pain in words. The quadrant where the pain is located helps identify the underlying organs that may be involved. If clothes
interfere, repeat the question during the physical examination.

In emergency rooms, 40% to 45% of
patients have nonspecific pain, but
15% to 30% need surgery, usually for
appendicitis, intestinal obstruction,
or cholecystitis.6
Doubling over with cramping colicky
pain signals a renal stone. Sudden knifelike epigastric pain often radiating to
the back is typical of pancreatitis.7–9
Epigastric pain occurs with gastroesophageal reflex disease (GERD), pancreatitis, and perforated ulcers. RUQ
and upper abdominal pain are common in cholecystitis and cholangitis.10

■ Ask the patient to rank the severity of the pain on a scale of 1 to 10. Note

that severity does not always help identify the cause. Sensitivity to
abdominal pain varies widely and tends to diminish in older adults,
masking acute abdominal conditions. Individual differences in pain
thresholds and accommodation to pain during daily activities also affect
ratings of severity.
■ As you explore factors that aggravate or relieve the pain, pay special attention

to body position, association with meals, alcohol, medications (including
aspirin and aspirin-like drugs and any over-the-counter medications),
stress, and use of antacids. Ask if indigestion or discomfort is related to
exertion and relieved by rest.

Note that angina from inferior wall
coronary artery disease may present
as “indigestion,” but is precipitated by
exertion and relieved by rest. See
Table 8-1, Chest Pain, pp. 330–331.

Chronic Upper Abdominal Discomfort or Pain. Dyspepsia is deﬁned
as chronic or recurrent discomfort or pain centered in the upper abdomen, characterized by postprandial fullness, early satiety, and epigastric pain or burning.3,5
Discomfort is deﬁned as a subjective negative feeling that is nonpainful. It can
include various symptoms such as bloating, nausea, upper abdominal fullness,
and heartburn.

C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

455

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY
■ Note that bloating, nausea, or belching can occur alone but also can accom-

pany other disorders. If these conditions occur alone, they do not meet the
criteria for dyspepsia.
■ Many patients with upper abdominal discomfort or pain will have functional,

or nonulcer, dyspepsia, deﬁned as a 3-month history of nonspeciﬁc upper
abdominal discomfort or nausea not attributable to structural abnormalities
or peptic ulcer disease. Symptoms are usually recurring and present for more
than 6 months.5
Many patients with chronic upper abdominal discomfort or pain complain of
heartburn, dysphagia, or regurgitation. If patients report heartburn and regurgitation together more than once a week, the accuracy of diagnosing GERD is over
90%.3,11,12

■ Heartburn is a rising retrosternal burning pain or discomfort occurring

weekly or more often. It is typically aggravated by foods such as alcohol,
chocolate, citrus fruits, coffee, onions, and peppermint; or positions like
bending over, exercising, lifting, or lying supine.
■ Some patients with GERD have atypical respiratory symptoms such as

chest pain, cough, wheezing, and aspiration pneumonia. Others complain
of pharyngeal symptoms, such as hoarseness chronic sore throat, and laryngitis.13
■ Some patients may have “alarm symptoms,” such as
■ Difﬁculty swallowing (dysphagia)
■ Pain with swallowing (odynophagia)
■ Recurrent vomiting
■ Evidence of GI bleeding
■ Early satiety
■ Weight loss
■ Anemia
■ Risk factors for gastric cancer

Bloating may occur with lactose intolerance, inflammatory bowel disease, or
ovarian cancer; belching results from
aerophagia, or swallowing air.
Multifactorial causes include delayed
gastric emptying (20% to 40%), gastritis from Helicobacter pylori (20% to
60%), peptic ulcer disease (up to 15%
if H. pylori is present), irritable bowel
disease, and psychosocial factors.3
These symptoms or mucosal damage
on endoscopy are the diagnostic criteria for GERD. Risk factors include
reduced salivary flow, which prolongs
acid clearance by damping action of
the bicarbonate buffer; obesity;
delayed gastric emptying; selected
medications; and hiatal hernia.
Angina from inferior wall coronary
ischemia along the diaphragm may
also present as heartburn. See
Table 8-1, Chest Pain, pp. 330–331.
A total of 30% to 90% of patients with
asthma and 10% with specialty referral
for throat conditions have GERD-like
symptoms.
Patients who have uncomplicated
GERD that fails empiric therapy, age
>55 years, and “alarm symptoms” warrant endoscopy to evaluate possible
esophagitis, peptic strictures, Barrett
esophagus, or esophageal cancer. Of
those with suspected GERD, ∼50% to
85% have no disease on endoscopy.14,15
Approximately 10% of patients with
chronic heartburn have Barrett esophagus, a metaplastic change in the esophageal lining from normal squamous to
columnar epithelium. In those affected,
dysplasia on endoscopy increases the
risk of esophageal cancer from 0.1% to
0.5% (no dysplasia) to 6% to 19% per
patient year (high-grade dysplasia).14

■ Palpable mass
■ Painless jaundice.

456

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY
Lower Abdominal Pain and Discomfort. Lower abdominal pain and
discomfort may be acute or chronic. Asking the patient to point to the pain and
characterize all its features, combined with ﬁndings on the physical examination,
is key to identifying possible causes. Some acute pain, especially in the suprapubic
area or radiating from the ﬂank, originates in the genitourinary tract (see p. 463).
Acute Lower Abdominal Pain. Patients may complain of acute pain
localized to the RLQ. Find out if it is sharp and continuous, or intermittent and
cramping, causing them to double over.

RLQ pain or pain that migrates from the
periumbilical region, combined with
abdominal wall rigidity on palpation, is
suspicious for appendicitis. In women,
consider pelvic inflammatory disease,
ruptured ovarian follicle, and ectopic
pregnancy. Combining signs with laboratory inflammatory markers and CT
scans markedly reduces misdiagnosis
and unnecessary surgery.16–19
Cramping pain radiating to the right
or LLQ or groin may be a renal stone.

When patients report acute pain in the LLQ or diffuse abdominal pain, investigate
associated symptoms such as fever and loss of appetite.

LLQ pain, especially with a palpable
mass, signals diverticulitis. Diffuse
abdominal pain with abdominal distention, hyperactive high-pitched
bowel sounds, and tenderness on palpation marks small or large bowel
obstruction (see pp. 488–489); pain
with absent bowel sounds, rigidity,
percussion tenderness, and guarding
points to peritonitis.

Chronic Lower Abdominal Pain. If there is chronic pain in the quadrants
of the lower abdomen, ask about change in bowel habits and alternating diarrhea and constipation.

Change in bowel habits with a mass
lesion warns of colon cancer. Intermittent pain for 12 weeks of the preceding
12 months with relief from defecation,
change in frequency of bowel movements, or change in form of stool
(loose, watery, pellet-like), linked to
luminal and mucosal irritants that alter
motility, secretion, and pain sensitivity
suggests irritable bowel syndrome.20

Abdominal Pain and Associated Gastrointestinal Symptoms.
Patients often experience abdominal pain in conjunction with other symptoms.
Begin by asking “How is your appetite?” then pursue symptoms such as indigestion,
nausea, vomiting, and anorexia. Indigestion is a general term for distress associated
with eating that can have many meanings. Urge your patient to be more speciﬁc.

Anorexia, nausea, and vomiting accompany many GI disorders, including
pregnancy, diabetic ketoacidosis, adrenal insufficiency, hypercalcemia, uremia,
liver disease, emotional states, and
adverse drug reactions. Induced vomiting without nausea is more indicative
of anorexia/bulimia.

■ Nausea, often described as “feeling sick to my stomach,” may progress to

retching and vomiting. Retching describes involuntary spasm of the stomach,
diaphragm, and esophagus that precedes and culminates in vomiting, the
forceful expulsion of gastric contents out of the mouth.

C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

457

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY
Some patients may not actually vomit but raise esophageal or gastric contents without nausea or retching, called regurgitation.

Regurgitation occurs in GERD, esophageal stricture, and esophageal cancer.

Ask about any vomitus or regurgitated material and inspect it if possible,
noting the color, odor, and quantity. Help the patient to specify the amount:
a teaspoon? Two teaspoons? A cupful?

Vomiting and pain indicate small
bowel obstruction. Fecal odor occurs
with small bowel obstruction and
gastrocolic fistula.

Ask speciﬁcally if the vomitus contains any blood, and quantify the amount.
Gastric juice is clear and mucoid. Small amounts of yellowish or greenish
bile are common and have no special signiﬁcance. Brownish or blackish
vomitus with a “coffee grounds” appearance suggests blood altered by gastric
acid. Coffee ground emesis or red blood is called hematemesis.

Hematemesis may accompany esophageal or gastric varices, Mallory–Weiss
tears, or peptic ulcer disease.

Is there any dehydration or electrolyte imbalance from prolonged vomiting
or signiﬁcant blood loss? Do the patient’s symptoms suggest any complications of vomiting, such as aspiration into the lungs, seen in debilitated,
obtunded, or elderly patients?

Symptoms of blood loss such as lightheadedness or syncope depend on the
rate and volume of bleeding and are
rare until blood loss exceeds 500 cm3.

■ Anorexia is loss or lack of appetite. Find out if it arises from intolerance to

“Food fear” with abdominal pain and
a slightly distended soft nontender
abdomen are hallmarks of mesenteric
ischemia.

certain foods, fear of abdominal discomfort (or “food fear”), or distortions in
self-image. Check for associated nausea and vomiting.
Patients may complain of unpleasant abdominal fullness after light or moderate
meals, or early satiety, the inability to eat a full meal. A dietary assessment or
recall may be warranted (see Chapter 4, General Survey, Vital Signs, and Pain,
pp. 117–118).

If fullness or early satiety, consider
diabetic gastroparesis, anticholinergic
medications, gastric outlet obstruction,
and gastric cancer; if early satiety, also
consider hepatitis.

Other Gastrointestinal Symptoms
Difﬁculty Swallowing (Dysphagia) and/or Painful Swallowing (Odynophagia). Less commonly, patients may report difﬁculty swallowing from
impaired passage of solid foods or liquids from the mouth to the stomach, or
dysphagia. Food seems to stick or “not go down right,” suggesting motility disorders or structural anomalies. The sensation of a lump or foreign body in the
throat unrelated to swallowing, called a globus sensation, is not true dysphagia.

For types of dysphagia, see Table 11-2,
Dysphagia, p. 490.

Ask the patient to point to where the dysphagia occurs.

Pointing to below the sternoclavicular
notch suggests esophageal dysphagia.

Pursue which types of foods provoke symptoms: solids, or solids and liquids?
Establish the timing. When does the dysphagia start? Is it intermittent or persistent? Is it progressing? If so, over what time period? Are there associated symptoms and clinical conditions?

If solid foods, consider structural
causes like esophageal stricture, webbing or Schatzki ring, and neoplasm; if
solids and liquids, a motility disorder
like achalasia is more likely.

458

Indicators of oropharyngeal dysphagia
include drooling, nasopharyngeal
regurgitation, and cough from aspiration. Gurgling or regurgitation of undigested food occurs in GERD, motility
disorders, and structural disorders like
esophageal stricture and Zenker diverticulum. Causes are generally mechanical/obstructive in younger adults and
neurologic/muscular in older adults
(stroke, Parkinson disease).21

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
THE HEALTH HISTORY

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Is there odynophagia, or pain on swallowing?

Consider esophageal ulceration from
ingestion of aspirin or nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents, caustic ingestion,
radiation, or infection with Candida,
cytomegalovirus, herpes simplex, or HIV.

Change in Bowel Function. To assess bowel function, start with openended questions: “How are your bowel movements?” “How often do they occur
in a week?” “Do you have any difﬁculties?” “Have you noticed any change in stool
pattern or appearance?” The range of normal frequency is broad, and can be as
low as three bowel movements per week.

Some patients may complain of passing excessive gas, or ﬂatus, normally about
600 mL/d.

Causes include aerophagia, ingestion
of legumes or other gas-producing
foods, intestinal lactase deficiency, and
irritable bowel syndrome.

Diarrhea. Diarrhea is deﬁned as painless loose or watery stools during
≥75% of defecations for the prior 3 months, with symptom onset at least
6 months prior to diagnosis.22,23 Stool volume may increase to >200 g in 24 hours.

See Table 11-3, Diarrhea, pp. 491–493.

■ Ask about the duration. Acute diarrhea lasts up to 2 weeks. Chronic diarrhea

Acute diarrhea, especially foodborne,
is usually caused by infection.20
Chronic diarrhea is typically noninfectious in origin, as in Crohn disease and
ulcerative colitis.

is deﬁned as lasting 4 weeks or more.

■ Ask about the characteristics of the diarrhea, including volume, frequency,

and consistency.

High-volume frequent watery stools are
usually from the small intestine; smallvolume stools with tenesmus, or diarrhea with mucus, pus, or blood occur in
rectal inflammatory conditions.

■ Is there mucus, pus, or blood? Is there associated tenesmus, a constant urge

to defecate, accompanied by pain, cramping, and involuntary straining?
■ Does diarrhea occur at night?

Nocturnal diarrhea is usually pathologic.

■ Are the stools greasy or oily? Frothy? Foul-smelling? Floating on the surface

Oily residue, sometimes frothy or
floating, occurs with steatorrhea (fatty
diarrheal stools) from malabsorption
in celiac sprue, pancreatic insufficiency,
and small bowel bacterial overgrowth.

because of excessive gas?

■ Explore associated features that are important in identifying possible causes.

These include current and alternative medications, especially antibiotics,
recent travel, diet patterns, baseline bowel habits, and risk factors for immunocompromise.

Constipation. Ask about stool characteristics identiﬁed by the Rome III
criteria, which stipulate that constipation should be present for the last 3 months

Diarrhea is common with use of penicillins and macrolides, magnesiumbased antacids, metformin, and
herbal and alternative medicines. If
recent hospitalization, consider
Clostridium difficile infection.24
See Table 11-4, Constipation,
p. 494.

C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

459

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
THE HEALTH HISTORY

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

with symptom onset at least 6 months prior to diagnosis and meet at least two
of the following conditions: fewer than three bowel movements per week; 25%
or more defecations with either straining or sensation of incomplete evacuation;
lumpy or hard stools; or manual facilitation.22,23

Types of primary or functional constipation are normal transit, slow transit,
impaired expulsion (from pelvic floor
disorders), and constipation-predominant irritable bowel syndrome. Secondary causes include medications
and conditions like amyloidosis, diabetes, and CNS disorders.25,26

■ Check if the patient actually looks at the stool and can describe its color and

Thin, pencil-like stool occurs in an
obstructing “apple-core” lesion of the
sigmoid colon.

bulk.
■ What remedies has the patient tried? Do medications or stress play a role?

Are there associated systemic disorders?

Anticholinergic agents, calcium channel
blockers, iron supplements, and opiates
can cause constipation. Constipation
also occurs with diabetes, hypothyroidism, hypercalcemia, multiple sclerosis,
Parkinson disease, and systemic sclerosis.

■ Occasionally, there is no passage of either feces or gas, or obstipation.

Obstipation signifies intestinal
obstruction.

■ Inquire about the color of stools. Is there melena, or black tarry stools, or

See Table 11-5, Black and Bloody
Stools, p. 495.

hematochezia, stools that are red or maroon-colored? Determine the quantity
and frequency of any blood.

■ Is the blood mixed in with stool or on the surface? Does the blood appear as

streaks on the toilet paper or is it more copious?

Melena may appear with as little as
100 mL of blood from upper GI bleeding; hematochezia, if more than
1,000 mL of blood, is usually from
lower GI bleeding, but if massive can
have an upper GI source.
Blood on the surface or toilet paper
points to hemorrhoids.

Jaundice. Jaundice or icterus, is a striking yellowish discoloration of the
skin and sclerae from increased levels of bilirubin, a bile pigment derived chieﬂy
from the breakdown of hemoglobin. Normally, the hepatocytes conjugate
unconjugated bilirubin with other substances, making the bile water soluble,
and then excrete the conjugated bilirubin into the bile. The bile passes through
the cystic duct into the common bile duct, which also drains the extrahepatic
ducts from the liver. More distally, the common bile duct and the pancreatic
ducts empty into the duodenum at the ampulla of Vater. Mechanisms of jaundice are listed on next page.

460

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY

Mechanisms of Jaundice
Increased production of bilirubin
Decreased uptake of bilirubin by the hepatocytes
● Decreased ability of the liver to conjugate bilirubin
● Decreased excretion of bilirubin into the bile, resulting in absorption of conjugated bilirubin back into the blood
●
●

Predominantly unconjugated bilirubin occurs from the first three mechanisms, as in hemolytic anemia
(increased production) and Gilbert
syndrome.
Impaired excretion of conjugated
bilirubin is seen in viral hepatitis, cirrhosis, primary biliary cirrhosis, and
drug-induced cholestasis from drugs
such as oral contraceptives, methyl
testosterone, and chlorpromazine.

Intrahepatic jaundice can be hepatocellular, from damage to the hepatocytes,
or cholestatic, from impaired excretion as a result of damaged hepatocytes or
intrahepatic bile ducts. Extrahepatic jaundice arises from obstruction of the
extrahepatic bile ducts, most commonly the common bile ducts.

Gallstones or pancreatic, cholangio-,
or duodenal carcinoma may obstruct
the common bile duct.

In patients with jaundice, pay special attention to the associated symptoms and
setting in which the illness occurred. What was the color of the urine as the patient
became ill? When the level of conjugated bilirubin increases in the blood, it may
be excreted into the urine, turning the urine a dark yellowish brown or tea color.
Unconjugated bilirubin is not water-soluble, so it is not excreted into urine. Is
there any associated pain?

Dark urine indicates impaired excretion of bilirubin into the GI tract.
Painless jaundice points to malignant obstruction of the bile ducts,
seen in duodenal or pancreatic carcinoma; painful jaundice is commonly
infectious in origin, as in hepatitis A
and cholangitis.

Ask also about the color of the stools. When excretion of bile into the intestine is
completely obstructed, the stools become gray or light colored, or acholic,
without bile.

Acholic stools may occur briefly in
viral hepatitis; they are common in
obstructive jaundice.

Does the skin itch without other obvious explanation? Is there associated pain?
What is its pattern? Has it been recurrent in the past?

Itching occurs in cholestatic or
obstructive jaundice.

Ask about risk factors for liver diseases, such as the following.
Risk Factors for Liver Disease
Hepatitis: Travel or meals in areas of poor sanitation, ingestion of contaminated water or foodstuﬀs (hepatitis A); parenteral or mucous membrane exposure to infectious body ﬂuids such as blood, serum, semen, and saliva,
especially through sexual contact with an infected partner or use of shared
needles for injection drug use (hepatitis B); illicit injection drug use or blood
transfusion (hepatitis C)
● Alcoholic hepatitis or alcoholic cirrhosis (screen patients carefully about
alcohol use)
● Toxic liver damage from medications, industrial solvents, environmental toxins,
or some anesthetic agents
● Gallbladder disease or surgery that may result in extrahepatic biliary obstruction
● Hereditary disorders in the Family History
●

C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

461

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY

The Urinary Tract
General questions include: “Do you have any difﬁculty passing urine?” “How
often do you go?” “Do you have to get up at night? How often?” “How much urine
do you pass at a time?” “Is there any pain or burning?” “Do you ever rush to urinate in time?” “Do you ever leak any urine? Or ﬁnd yourself wet unintentionally?”
Does the patient sense when the bladder is full and when voiding occurs?

See Table 11-6, Frequency, Nocturia,
and Polyuria, p. 496.

Ask women if sudden coughing, sneezing, or laughing causes loss of urine.
Roughly half of young women report this experience even before bearing children. Occasional leakage is not necessarily signiﬁcant. Ask older men, “Do you
have trouble starting your stream?” “Do you have to stand close to the toilet to
void?” “Is there a change in the force or size of your stream, or straining to void?”
“Do you hesitate or stop in the middle of voiding?” “Is there dribbling when
you’re through?”

Stress incontinence arises from
decreased intraurethral pressure
(see pp. 497–498).

Suprapubic Pain. Disorders in the urinary tract may cause pain in either
the abdomen or the back. Bladder disorders may cause suprapubic pain. In
bladder infection, pain in the lower abdomen is typically dull and pressure-like.
In sudden overdistention of the bladder, pain is often agonizing; in contrast,
chronic bladder distention is usually painless.

Pain from sudden overdistention
accompanies acute urinary retention.

Dysuria, Urgency, or Frequency. Infection or irritation of the bladder or
urethra frequently leads to pain on urination, usually felt as a burning sensation.
Some clinicians refer to this as dysuria, whereas others use the term dysuria to refer
to difﬁculty voiding. Women may report internal urethral discomfort, sometimes
described as a pressure, or an external burning from the ﬂow of urine across irritated
or inﬂamed labia. Men typically feel a burning sensation proximal to the glans penis.
In contrast, prostatic pain is felt in the perineum and occasionally in the rectum.

Painful urination accompanies cystitis
(bladder infection), urethritis, and urinary tract infections, bladder stones,
tumors, and, in men, acute prostatitis.
Women report internal burning in
urethritis, and external burning in
vulvovaginitis.

Other commonly associated urinary symptoms are urgency, an unusually intense
and immediate desire to void, sometimes leading to involuntary voiding or urge
incontinence, and frequency, or abnormally frequent voiding. Ask about any
related fever or chills, blood in the urine, or any pain in the abdomen, ﬂank, or
back (see Fig. 11-8). Men with partial obstruction to urinary outﬂow often report
hesitancy in starting the urine stream, straining to void, reduced caliber and force of
the urinary stream, or dribbling as voiding is completed.27

Urgency suggests urinary tract infection or irritation from possible urinary
calculi. Frequency is common in urinary tract infection and bladder neck
obstruction. In men, painful urination
without frequency or urgency suggests urethritis. Associated flank or
back pain suggests pyelonephritis.28,29

Involuntary voiding or lack of awareness suggests cognitive or neurosensory deficits.

These problems are common in men
with partial bladder outlet obstruction from benign prostatic hyperplasia
or urethral stricture.

See Table 15-3, Abnormalities of the
Prostate, p. 623.

Polyuria or Nocturia. Two additional terms describe important changes
in patterns of urination. Polyuria refers to a signiﬁcant increase in 24-hour
urine volume, roughly deﬁned as exceeding 3 L. It should be distinguished
from urinary frequency, which can be either the high volume (polyuria) or low
volume (infection). Nocturia refers to urinary frequency at night, sometimes
deﬁned as awakening the patient more than once; urine volumes may be large
or small. Clarify the patient’s daily total ﬂuid intake and how much occurs in
the evening.
462

Causes of polyuria include the high
fluid intake of psychogenic polydipsia
and poorly controlled diabetes, the
decreased secretion of antidiuretic
hormone (ADH) of central diabetes
insipidus, and the decreased renal
sensitivity to ADH of nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
THE HEALTH HISTORY

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Urinary Incontinence. Up to 30% of older adults are concerned about
urinary incontinence, an involuntary loss of urine that can be socially restricting and
cause problems with hygiene. If the patient reports incontinence, ask if the
patient is leaking small amounts of urine due to increased intra-abdominal
pressure from coughing, sneezing, laughing, or lifting. Or following an urge to
void, is there an involuntary loss of large amounts of urine? Is there a sensation
of bladder fullness, frequent leakage, or voiding of small amounts but difﬁculty
emptying the bladder?

See Table 11-7, Urinary Incontinence,
pp. 497–498.

Bladder control involves complex neuroregulatory and motor mechanisms
(see p. 452). Several central or peripheral nerve lesions affecting S2 to S4 can
affect normal voiding. Does the patient sense when the bladder is full? And
when voiding occurs? There are ﬁve broad categories of incontinence, including functional and mixed incontinence.

Functional incontinence arises from
impaired cognition, musculoskeletal
problems, or immobility. Combined
stress and urge incontinence is mixed
incontinence.

In stress incontinence, increased
abdominal pressure causes bladder
pressure to exceed urethral resistance—there is poor urethral sphincter tone or poor support of bladder
neck. In urge incontinence, urgency is
followed by involuntary leakage due
to uncontrolled detrusor contractions
that overcome urethral resistance. In
overflow incontinence, neurologic disorders or anatomic obstruction from
pelvic organs or the prostate limit
bladder emptying until the bladder
becomes overdistended.30–32

In addition, the patient’s functional status may affect voiding behaviors even
when the urinary tract is intact. Is the patient mobile? Alert? Able to respond to
voiding cues and reach the bathroom? Is alertness or voiding affected by medications?
Hematuria. Blood in the urine, or hematuria, is a major cause for concern.
When visible to the naked eye, it is called gross hematuria; the urine may appear
obviously bloody. Blood may be detected only during microscopic urinalysis,
known as microscopic hematuria; smaller amounts of blood may tinge the urine
with a pinkish or brownish cast. In women, be sure to distinguish menstrual
blood from hematuria. If the urine is reddish, ask about medications that might
discolor the urine. Test the urine with a dipstick and microscopic examination
before you diagnose hematuria.

Myoglobin from rhabdomyolosis can
also tinge the urine pink in the
absence of red cells.

Flank Pain and Ureteral Colic. Disorders of the urinary tract may also
cause kidney pain, often reported as ﬂank pain, at or below the posterior costal
margin near the CVA. It may radiate anteriorly toward the umbilicus. Kidney
pain is a visceral pain usually produced by distention of the renal capsule and
typically dull, aching, and steady. Ureteral colic is a dramatically different severe
colicky pain radiating around the trunk into the lower abdomen and groin, or
possibly into the upper thigh, testicle, or labium. Ureteral pain results from
sudden distention of the ureter and the renal pelvis. Ask about any associated
fever, chills, or hematuria (Fig. 11-8).

Flank pain, fever, and chills signal
acute pyelonephritis.

Renal or ureteral colic is caused by
sudden obstruction of a ureter, for
example, from renal or urinary stones
or blood clots.

C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

463

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

Kidney pain
Ureteral pain

FIGURE 11-8.

Radiation of renal and ureteral pain.

Health Promotion and
Counseling: Evidence and
Recommendations
Important Topics for Health Promotion
and Counseling
Screening for alcohol abuse
Viral hepatitis: risk factors, vaccines, and screening
● Screening for colon cancer
●
●

Screening for Alcohol Abuse. The 2013 National Survey on Drug Use
and Health (NSDUH) estimated that over 130 million Americans ages 12 years
and older, or 52.2%, were current alcohol users based on consumption of
alcoholic beverages in the past 30 days; 16.5 million, or 6.3%, were classiﬁed as
heavy drinkers and 60.1 million, or 22.9%, were classiﬁed as binge drinkers.33
Addictions are increasingly viewed as chronic relapsing behavioral disorders
with substance-induced alterations of brain neurotransmitters resulting in
tolerance, physical dependence, sensitization, craving, and relapse. The
NSDUH data showed that about 17 million persons ages 12 years or older met
criteria for alcohol use disorder (dependence or abuse), though only 1.4 million,
or 7.9%, underwent treatment at a specialized facility.

464

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Alert clinicians often notice clues of unhealthy alcohol use from social patterns and behavioral issues that are elicited during the history. The patient
may report a family history of substance abuse, unstable relationships, difﬁculty holding jobs, or legal problems related to violent behaviors or driving
under the inﬂuence.34,35 Many clinical conditions are associated with chronic
excessive alcohol use, including GI diseases, malignancies, cardiovascular
diseases, mental health problems, nutritional deﬁciencies, and neurologic
disorders. Excessive alcohol use has numerous short-term health risks,
including injuries, violence (homicide, suicide, sexual assault, intimate partner violence), alcohol poisoning, and adverse effects on reproductive health
(risky sexual behaviors, miscarriage, and fetal alcohol disorders). The
abdominal examination may reveal classic ﬁndings of liver disease such as
hepatosplenomegaly, ascites, or caput medusae (dilated abdominal veins).

See Chapter 3, Interviewing and the
Health History, Alcohol and Illicit Drugs,
pp. 65–108, and Chapter 5, Behavior
and Mental Status, pp. 157–158.

Because early detection of at-risk behaviors may be challenging, the U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommends screening for risky
or hazardous alcohol use and brief behavioral counseling interventions
when indicated for all adults in primary care settings, including pregnant
women (grade B).36 Learn the approach to identifying problem drinking. If
your patient reports drinking alcoholic beverages, ask the initial screening
question about heavy drinking (see below) and follow up with the wellvalidated CAGE questionnaire, the Alcohol Use Disorders Identiﬁcation Test
(AUDIT), or the shorter AUDIT-C questionnaire.35 Keep in mind cutoffs for
problem drinking.

See Chapter 3, Interviewing and
the Health History, for the CAGE
questions, p. 97.

Other classic findings include jaundice, spider angiomas, palmar erythema, Dupuytren contractures,
asterixis, and gynecomastia.

Screening for Problem Drinking
Standard Drink Equivalents: 1 standard drink is equivalent to 12 oz of regular
beer or wine cooler, 8 ounces of malt liquor, 5 ounces of wine, or 1.5 ounces of
80-proof spirits.
Initial Screening Question: “How many times in the past year have you had 4 or
more drinks a day (women), or 5 or more drinks a day (men)?”
Deﬁnitions of Drinking Levels for Adults—National Institute of Alcohol Abuse
and Alcoholism37

Moderate drinking
Unsafe drinking levels (increased
risk for developing an alcohol
use disorder)a
Binge drinkingb

Women

Men

≤1 drink/d
>3 drinks/d and
>7 drinks/wk

≤2 drinks/d
>4 drinks/d and
>14 drinks/wk

≥4 drinks on one
occasion

≥5 drinks on one
occasion

a

Pregnant women and those with health problems that could be worsened by drinking should not
drink any alcohol.
b
Brings blood alcohol level to 0.08 g%, usually within 2 hrs.

C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

465

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Tailor your recommendations to the severity of the drinking problem, ranging
from brief behavioral counseling interventions to clinical therapy and/or longterm rehabilitation programs. Use the helpful National Institute of Alcohol Abuse
and Alcoholism publications, “Clinician’s Guide for Helping Patients Who Drink
Too Much,”38 and “Prescribing Medications for Alcohol Dependence.”39
Viral Hepatitis: Risk Factors, Screening, and Vaccination. The
best strategy for preventing infection and transmission of hepatitis A and B is
vaccination. Also, educate patients about how the hepatitis viruses spread and
behavioral strategies to reduce the risk of infection. Screen high-risk groups for
hepatitis B.
Hepatitis A. Transmission of hepatitis A virus (HAV) is through a fecal–
oral route. Fecal shedding followed by poor hand washing contaminates water
and foods, leading to infection of household and sexual contacts. Infected children are often asymptomatic, contributing to spread of infection. To reduce
transmission, advise hand washing with soap and water after bathroom use or
changing diapers, and before preparing or eating food. Diluted bleach can be
used to clean environmental surfaces.40 HAV infection is rarely fatal—fewer
than 100 deaths occur each year—and usually only in people with other liver
diseases; it does not cause chronic hepatitis.41

CDC Recommendations for Hepatitis A
Vaccination
All children at age 1 year
Individuals with chronic liver disease
● Groups at increased risk of acquiring HAV: travelers to areas with high
endemic rates of infection, men who have sex with men, injection and illicit
drug users, individuals working with nonhuman primates, and persons who
have clotting factor disorders.42
●
●

The vaccine alone may be administered at any time before traveling to endemic
areas.
Postexposure Prophylaxis. Healthy unvaccinated individuals should receive
either a hepatitis A vaccine or a single dose of immune globulin (preferred for
those ≥age 40 years) within 2 weeks of being exposed to HAV. These recommendations apply to close personal contacts of persons with conﬁrmed HAV, coworkers of infected food handlers, and staff and attendees (and their household
members) of child care centers where HAV has been diagnosed in children, staff,
or households of attendees.

Hepatitis B. Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a more serious threat than
infection with hepatitis A. The fatality rate for acute infection can be up to 1%
and HBV infection can become chronic.43 Approximately 95% of infections in
healthy adults are self-limited, with elimination of the virus and development of
immunity. Risk of chronic HBV infection is highest when the immune system
is immature—chronic infection occurs in 90% of infected infants and 30% of
466

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
children infected before age 5 years. About 15% to 25% of those with chronic
HBV infection die from cirrhosis or liver cancer, accounting for nearly 3,000
deaths each year in the United States. Most persons with chronic infection are
asymptomatic until the onset of advanced liver disease.
Screening. The USPSTF recommends screening for HBV in persons at high
risk for infection (grade B), including those born in countries with a high endemic
prevalence of HBV infection, persons with HIV, injection drug users, men who
have sex with men, and household contacts or sexual partners of HBV-infected
persons.44 The CDC recommends screening all pregnant women, ideally in the
ﬁrst trimester, and universal vaccination for all infants beginning at birth.43 For
adults, vaccine recommendations also target high-risk groups, including those
in high-risk settings (see below).

CDC Recommendations for Hepatitis B
Vaccination: High-Risk Groups and Settings
Sexual contacts, including sex partners of hepatitis B surface antigen-positive
persons, people with more than one sex partner in the prior 6 months, people
seeking evaluation and treatment for sexually transmitted infections, and
men who have sex with men
● People with percutaneous or mucosal exposure to blood, including injection drug
users, household contacts of antigen-positive persons, residents and staﬀ of
facilities for the developmentally disabled, health care workers, and people
on dialysis
● Others, including travelers to endemic areas, people with chronic liver
disease and HIV infection, and people seeking protection from hepatitis B
infection
● All adults in high-risk settings, such as sexually transmitted disease (STD) clinics, HIV testing and treatment programs, drug-abuse treatment programs and
programs for injection drug users, correctional facilities, programs for men
having sex with men, chronic hemodialysis facilities and end-stage renal disease programs, and facilities for people with developmental disabilities
●

Hepatitis C. There is no vaccination for hepatitis C, so prevention targets
counseling to avoid risk factors. Screening should be recommended for high-risk
groups.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV), transmitted mainly by percutaneous exposures, is the
most prevalent chronic bloodborne pathogen in the United States. Anti-HCV
antibody is detectable in just under 2% of the population, though prevalence is
markedly increased in high-risk groups, particularly injection drug users.45 Additional risk factors for HCV infection include blood transfusion or organ transplantation before 1992, transfusion with clotting factors before 1987, hemodialysis,
health care workers with needle stick injury or mucosal exposure to HCV-positive
blood, HIV infection, and birth from an HCV-positive mother. Sexual transmission
is rare. Hepatitis C becomes a chronic illness in over 75% of those infected and
is a major risk factor for subsequent cirrhosis, hepatocellular carcinoma, and
C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

467

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
need for liver transplant for end-stage liver disease.45–47 However, the majority of persons with chronic HCV are unaware of being infected. Response to
antiviral therapy (undetectable HCV RNA 24 weeks after completing treatment) ranges from 40% to over 90% depending on the viral genotype and the
combination of drugs used for treatment. Consequently, the USPSTF has concluded that screening for hepatitis C infection is of moderate beneﬁt for persons at high risk for infection as well as those born between 1945 and 1965
(grade B).48
Screening for Colorectal Cancer
Epidemiology. Colorectal cancer is the third most frequently diagnosed
cancer among both men and women (over 140,000 new cases) and the third
leading cause of cancer death (nearly 50,000 deaths) each year in the United
States.49 The lifetime risk of diagnosis with colorectal cancer is about 5%, while
the lifetime risk for dying from colorectal cancer is about 2%.50 The good news
is that U.S. incidence and mortality rates have been gradually but steadily declining over the past three decades. These trends are attributed to changes in risk
factor prevalence, such as decreased tobacco use; increased screening, which
both prevents cancers and increases detection of early-stage curable cancers; and
improved treatment.51
Risk Factors. The strongest risk factors for colorectal cancer are: increasing age; personal history of colorectal cancer, adenomatous polyps, or longstanding inﬂammatory bowel disease; and family history of colorectal
neoplasia—particularly those with affected multiple ﬁrst-degree relatives, a single ﬁrst-degree relative diagnosed before age 60 years, or a hereditary colorectal
cancer syndrome. Weaker risk factors include male sex, African American race,
tobacco use, excessive alcohol use, red meat consumption, and obesity. Aside
from age, persons without any strong risk factors are considered average risk—
even if they have some of the weak risk factors. Overall, 90% of new cases and
94% of deaths occur after age 50 years52; the median age at diagnosis is 68 years
and the median age at death is 74 years.50 While the lifetime risk of colorectal
cancer is extremely high in patients with hereditary syndromes, about 75% of
colorectal cancers arise in people without any obvious hereditary risk or common exposures among family members.53
Prevention. The most effective prevention strategy is to screen for and
remove pre-cancerous adenomatous polyps. Screening programs using fecal
blood testing or ﬂexible sigmoidoscopy have been shown in randomized trials
to reduce the risk of developing colorectal cancer by about 15% to 20%.54,55
Physical activity, aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs),
and postmenopausal combined hormone replacement therapy (estrogen and
progestin) are also associated with decreased risk of colorectal cancer.46–59 However, the USPSTF recommends against routinely using aspirin and NSAIDs for
prevention in average-risk persons because the potential harms, including GI
bleeding, hemorrhagic stroke, and renal impairment, outweigh the beneﬁts
(grade D).60 Hormone therapy for cancer chemoprevention is not advised;
women receiving combined therapy were actually more likely to present with
advanced-staged colorectal cancers and appear to have a higher risk for colorectal cancer mortality.61 Furthermore, hormone therapy is associated with increased
468

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
risk of breast cancer, cardiovascular events, and venous thromboembolism.62–64
There has been no convincing evidence that dietary changes or taking supplements can prevent colorectal cancer.53
Screening Tests. Screening tests include stool tests that detect occult fecal
blood, such as fecal immunochemical tests, high-sensitivity guaiac-based tests,
and tests that detect abnormal DNA. Endoscopic tests are also used for screening,
including colonoscopy, which visualizes the entire colon and can remove polyps,
and ﬂexible sigmoidoscopy, which visualizes the distal 60 cm of the bowel. Imaging tests include the double-contrast barium enema and CT colonography. Any
abnormal ﬁnding on a stool test, imaging study, or ﬂexible sigmoidoscopy warrants further evaluation with colonoscopy. Screening programs using fecal blood
testing or ﬂexible sigmoidoscopy have been shown in randomized trials to reduce
the risk colorectal cancer death by about 15% to 30%.54,55 Although colonoscopy
is the gold standard diagnostic test for screening, there is no direct evidence from
randomized trials that screening with colonoscopy reduces colorectal cancer incidence or mortality. Complications of colonoscopy include perforation and bleeding;65 patients are usually sedated during the procedure, but many are averse to
the extensive bowel preparation required.
Guidelines. The USPSTF and a collaborative multiorganizational group,
consisting of the American Cancer Society, the U.S. Multi-Society Task Force on
Colorectal Cancer, and the American College of Radiology, both strongly endorse
colorectal cancer screening and have issued screening guidelines. 66,67 The
USPSTF, which gives a grade A recommendation for colorectal cancer screening
in average-risk adults ages 50 to 75 years, suggests several screening options, and
advises that routine screening stop at age 75 years (see below). The multiorganizational group additionally recommends using double-contrast barium enema
or CT colonography every 5 years as well as the fecal DNA test. However, there
is no evidence that screening with these tests will reduce colorectal cancer incidence or mortality. Performing digital rectal examination is not recommended
for colorectal cancer screening.

U.S. Preventive Services Task Force: 2008
Screening Recommendations for
Colorectal Cancer
Adults ages 50 to 75 years—options (grade A recommendation)
● High-sensitivity fecal occult blood testing (FOBT) annually, either a guaiacbased or fecal immunochemical test
● Sigmoidoscopy every 5 years with high-sensitivity FOBT every 3 years
● Screening colonoscopy every 10 years
● Adults ages 76 to 85 years—do not screen routinely (grade C recommendation)
● Screening not advised because the beneﬁts are small in comparison to the
risks
● Use individual decision making if screening an adult for the ﬁrst time
● Adults older than age 85 years—do not screen (grade D recommendation)
● Screening not advised because “competing causes of mortality preclude a
mortality beneﬁt that outweighs harms”
●

C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

469

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Although screening reduces colorectal cancer incidence and mortality, only
about two thirds of the adult U.S. population has complied with recommended
screening guidelines, and over a quarter has never been screened.68 Colonoscopy
is the most commonly used test, though people may prefer other tests like FOBTs
because they are safer and easier to perform.69 Keep in mind that the best screening test is the one that gets done!
Higher-risk persons, based on personal history of colorectal neoplasia or longstanding inﬂammatory bowel disease, or a family history of colorectal neoplasia, should begin screening at a younger age, usually with colonoscopy, and get
more frequent testing than average-risk adults.70

Techniques of Examination
To begin, explain the steps for examining the abdomen to the patient and locate
a good light. The patient should have an empty bladder. Pay special attention
when draping to expose the abdomen, as pictured and detailed below.
Tips for Examining the Abdomen
Make the patient comfortable in the supine position, with a pillow under the
head and perhaps under the knees. Slide your hand under the low back to see
if the patient is relaxed and lying ﬂat on the table.
● Ask the patient to keep the arms at the sides or folded across the chest. When
the arms are above the head, the abdominal wall stretches and tightens,
which hinders palpation.
● Draping the patient. To expose the abdomen, place the drape or sheet at the
level of the symphysis pubis, then raise the gown to below the nipple line
just above the xiphoid process. The groin should be visible but the genitalia
should remain covered. The abdominal muscles should be relaxed to enhance
all aspects of the examination, especially palpation.
● Before you begin, ask the patient to point to any areas of pain so that you
can examine these areas last.
● Warm your hands and stethoscope. To warm your hands, rub them together or
place them under hot water.
● Approach the patient calmly and avoid quick unexpected movements. Avoid
having long ﬁngernails which can scratch or scrape the patient’s skin.
● Stand at the patient’s right side and proceed in a systematic fashion with
inspection, auscultation, percussion, and palpation. Visualize each organ in
the region you are examining. Watch the patient’s face for any signs of pain
or discomfort.
● If necessary, distract the patient with conversation or questions. If the
patient is frightened or ticklish, begin palpation with the patient’s hand
under yours. After a few moments, slip your hand underneath to palpate
directly.
●

470

Arching the back pushes the
abdomen forward and tightens
the abdominal muscles.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

The Abdomen
Inspection. First, observe the general appearance of the patient—lying
quietly, writhing with discomfort, or gripping one side.

From the right side of the bed, inspect the surface, contours, and movements of
the abdomen. Watch for bulges or peristalsis. Try to sit or bend down so that you
can view the abdomen tangentially (Fig. 11-9).

Umbilicus

Groin

FIGURE 11-9.

Inspect the contours of the abdomen.

Note especially:
■ The skin, including:
■ Temperature. Check if the skin is warm, or cool and clammy.
■ Color. Note any bruises, erythema, or jaundice.
■ Scars. Describe or diagram their location.
■ Striae. Old silver striae or stretch marks are normal.

Pink–purple striae are a hallmark of
Cushing syndrome.

■ Dilated veins. A few small veins may be visible normally.

Dilated veins suggest portal hypertension from cirrhosis (caput medusae)
or inferior vena cava obstruction.

■ Rashes or ecchymoses

Ecchymosis of the abdominal wall is
seen in intraperitoneal or retroperitoneal hemorrhage.

■ The umbilicus. Observe its contour and location and any inﬂammation or

bulges suggesting a ventral hernia.

See Table 11-8, Localized Bulges in the
Abdominal Wall, p. 499.

C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

471

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

■ The contour of the abdomen
■ Is it ﬂat, rounded, protuberant, or scaphoid (markedly concave or hollowed)?

See Table 11-9, Protuberant
Abdomens, p. 500.

■ Do the ﬂanks bulge, or are there any local bulges? Also survey the inguinal

Observe for the bulging flanks of ascites, the suprapubic bulge of a distended
bladder or pregnant uterus, and ventral, femoral, or inguinal hernias.

and femoral areas.

■ Is the abdomen symmetric?

Asymmetry suggests a hernia, an
enlarged organ, or a mass.

■ Are there visible organs or masses? An enlarged liver or spleen may

Inspect for the lower abdominal mass
of an ovarian or a uterine cancer.

descend below the rib cage.
■ Peristalsis. Observe the abdomen for several minutes if you suspect intestinal

obstruction. Normally, peristalsis is visible in very thin people.
■ Pulsations. The normal aortic pulsation is frequently visible in the epigas-

trium.

Inspect for the increased peristaltic
waves of intestinal obstruction.
Inspect for the increased pulsations of
an abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA)
or increased pulse pressure.

Auscultation. Auscultation provides important information about bowel
motility. Auscultate the abdomen before performing percussion or palpation,
maneuvers which may alter the characteristics of the bowel sounds. Learn to
identify variations in normal bowel sounds, the changed sounds suggestive of
peritoneal inﬂammation or obstruction, and bruits, which are vascular sounds
resembling heart murmurs over the aorta or other arteries in the abdomen.

See Table 11-10, Sounds in the
Abdomen, p. 501.

Place the diaphragm of your stethoscope gently on the abdomen. Listen for bowel
sounds and note their frequency and character. Normal sounds consist of clicks and
gurgles, occurring at an estimated frequency of 5 to 34 per minute. Occasionally
you may hear the prolonged gurgles of hyperperistalsis from “stomach growling,”
called borborygmi. Because bowel sounds are widely transmitted through the abdomen, listening in one spot, such as the RLQ, is usually sufﬁcient.

Altered bowel sounds are common
in diarrhea, intestinal obstruction,
paralytic ileus, and peritonitis.

Abdominal Bruits and Friction Rub. If the patient has hypertension,
auscultate the epigastrium and in each upper quadrant for bruits. Later in the
examination, when the patient sits up, listen also in the CVAs.

A bruit in one of these areas that has
both systolic and diastolic components strongly suggests renal artery
stenosis as the cause of hypertension.
A total of 4% to 20% of healthy individuals have abdominal bruits.71

Auscultate for bruits over the aorta, the iliac arteries, and the femoral arteries
(Fig. 11-10).

Bruits with both systolic and diastolic
components suggest turbulent blood
flow from atherosclerotic arterial disease.

Auscultate over the liver and spleen for friction rubs.

Friction rubs are present in hepatoma,
gonococcal infection around the liver,
splenic infarction, and pancreatic
carcinoma.

472

Bruits suggest vascular occlusive
disease.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

Aorta

Renal artery

Iliac artery

Femoral artery

F I G U R E 1 1 - 1 0 . Auscultate for bruits.

Percussion. Percussion helps you assess the amount and distribution of gas
in the abdomen, viscera and masses that are solid or ﬂuid-ﬁlled, and the size of
the liver and spleen.

Percuss the abdomen lightly in all four quadrants to determine the distribution
of tympany and dullness. Tympany usually predominates because of gas in the GI
tract, but scattered areas of dullness from ﬂuid and feces are also common.

A protuberant abdomen that is tympanitic throughout suggests intestinal
obstruction or paralytic ileus. See
Table 11-9, Protuberant Abdomens,
p. 500.

■ Note any dull areas suggesting an underlying mass or enlarged organ. This

Dull areas characterize a pregnant
uterus, an ovarian tumor, a distended
bladder, or a large liver or spleen.

observation will guide subsequent palpation.
■ On each side of a protuberant abdomen, note where abdominal tympany

changes to the dullness of solid posterior structures.

■ Brieﬂy percuss the lower anterior chest above the costal margins. On the

right, you will usually ﬁnd the dullness of the liver; on the left, the tympany
that overlies the gastric air bubble and the splenic ﬂexure of the colon.

Dullness in both flanks prompts
further assessment for ascites (see
pp. 484–485).
In the rare condition of situs inversus,
organs are reversed—air bubble on
the right, liver dullness on the left.

Palpation
Light Palpation. Gentle palpation aids detection of abdominal tenderness, muscular resistance, and some superﬁcial organs and masses. It also reassures and relaxes the patient.

Keeping your hand and forearm on a horizontal plane, with ﬁngers together and
ﬂat on the abdominal wall, palpate the abdomen with a light gentle dipping
motion. As you move your hand to different quadrants, raise it just off the skin.
Gliding smoothly, palpate in all four quadrants (Fig. 11-11).
C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

473

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

FIGURE 11-11.

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Begin with light palpation of the abdomen.

Identify any superﬁcial organs or masses and any area of tenderness or increased
resistance to palpation. If resistance is present, try to distinguish voluntary
guarding from involuntary rigidity or muscular spasm. Voluntary guarding usually decreases with the techniques listed below.

Involuntary rigidity typically persists
despite these maneuvers, suggesting
peritoneal inflammation.

■ Use the methods described earlier to help the patient relax (see p. 470).
■ Palpate after asking the patient to exhale, which usually relaxes the abdomi-

nal muscles.
■ Ask the patient to mouth-breathe with the jaws wide open.

Deep Palpation. Deep palpation is usually required to delineate the liver
edge, the kidneys, and abdominal masses. Again using the palmar surfaces of
your ﬁngers, press down in all four quadrants (Fig. 11-12). Identify any masses;
note their location, size, shape, consistency, tenderness, pulsations, and any
mobility with respiration or pressure from the examining hand. Correlate your
ﬁndings from palpation with their percussion notes.

FIGURE 11-12.

474

Abdominal masses may be categorized in several ways: physiologic
(pregnant uterus), inflammatory
(diverticulitis), vascular (an AAA), neoplastic (colon cancer), or obstructive
(a distended bladder or dilated loop
of bowel).

Use two hands for deep palpation.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Assessing Possible Peritonitis. Inﬂammation of the parietal peritoneum, or peritonitis, signals an acute abdomen.72 Signs of peritonitis include a
positive cough test, guarding, rigidity, rebound tenderness, and percussion tenderness. Even before palpation, ask the patient to cough and identify where the
cough produces pain. Then palpate gently, starting with one ﬁnger then with
your hand, to localize the area of pain. As you palpate, check for the peritoneal
signs of guarding, rigidity, and rebound tenderness.

When positive, these signs roughly
double the likelihood of peritonitis;
rigidity makes peritonitis almost four
times more likely.73 Causes include
appendicitis, cholecystitis, and a
perforation of the bowel wall.
See also Table 11-11, Tender
Abdomens, pp. 502–503.

Signs of Peritonitis
Guarding is a voluntary contraction of the abdominal wall, often accompanied
by a grimace that may diminish when the patient is distracted.
● Rigidity is an involuntary reﬂex contraction of the abdominal wall from peritoneal inﬂammation that persists over several examinations.
● Rebound tenderness refers to pain expressed by the patient after the examiner
presses down on an area of tenderness and suddenly removes the hand. To
assess rebound tenderness, ask the patient “Which hurts more, when I press
or let go?” Press down with your ﬁngers ﬁrmly and slowly, then withdraw your
hand quickly. The maneuver is positive if withdrawal produces pain. Percuss
gently to check for percussion tenderness.
●

The Liver
Because the rib cage shelters most of the liver, direct assessment is limited. Liver
size and shape can be estimated by percussion and palpation. Pressure from your
palpating hand helps you to evaluate the surface, consistency, and tenderness of
the liver.
Percussion. Measure the vertical span of liver dullness in the right
midclavicular line after carefully locating the midclavicular line to improve
accurate measurement. Use a light to moderate percussion strike, because a
heavier strike can lead to underestimates of liver size.74 Starting at a level well
below the umbilicus in the RLQ (in an area of tympany, not dullness), percuss
upward toward the liver. Identify the lower border of dullness in the midclavicular
line.

Estimates of liver span by percussion
have a 60% to 70% correlation with
actual span.

Next, identify the upper border of liver dullness. Starting at the nipple line,
percuss downward in the midclavicular line until lung resonance shifts to liver
dullness. Gently displace a woman’s breast as necessary to be sure that you start
in a resonant area. The directions of percussion are shown in Figure 11-13.

The span of liver dullness is increased
when the liver is enlarged.

C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

475

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

The span of liver dullness is decreased
when the liver is small, or when there
is free air below the diaphragm, as
from a perforated bowel or hollow viscus. Liver span may decrease with resolution of hepatitis or heart failure or,
less commonly, with progression of
fulminant hepatitis.
Liver dullness may be displaced
downward by the low diaphragm of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Span, however, remains normal.

FIGURE 11-13.

Dullness from a right pleural effusion
or consolidated lung, if adjacent to
liver dullness, may falsely increase
estimated liver size.

Percuss for liver dullness.

Now, measure in centimeters the distance between your two points—the vertical span of liver dullness. Normally, the liver span, shown in Figure 11-14, is
greater in men than in women and in taller compared to shorter individuals. If
the liver seems enlarged, outline the lower edge by percussing medially and
laterally.

Gas in the colon may produce tympany in the RUQ, obscure liver dullness, and falsely decrease estimated
liver size.

4–8 cm in
midsternal line

6–12 cm
in right
midclavicular
line

FIGURE 11-14.

Measure the liver span.

Measurements of liver span by percussion are more accurate when the liver is
enlarged with a palpable edge.75–77

In chronic liver disease, finding an
enlarged palpable liver edge roughly
doubles the likelihood of cirrhosis.74

Palpation. Place your left hand behind the patient, parallel to and supporting
the right 11th and 12th ribs and adjacent soft tissues below. Remind the patient
to relax on your hand. By pressing your left hand upward, the patient’s liver may
be felt more easily by your examining hand (Fig. 11-15).
476

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

FIGURE 11-15.

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Palpate the liver edge.

Place your right hand on the patient’s right abdomen lateral to the rectus muscle,
with your ﬁngertips well below the lower border of liver dullness (Fig. 11-16). Starting palpation too close to the right costal margin risks missing the lower edge
of an enlarged liver that extends into the RLQ (Fig. 11-17). Some examiners
point their ﬁngers up toward the patient’s head, whereas others prefer a somewhat more oblique position. In either case, press gently in and up.

FIGURE 11-16.

Palpate in steps toward the costal margin.

Ask the patient to take a deep breath. Try to feel the liver edge as it slides down to
meet your ﬁngertips. When palpable, the normal liver edge is soft, sharp, and regular with a smooth surface. If you feel the edge, slightly lighten the pressure of your
palpating hand so that the liver can slip under your ﬁnger pads and you can feel its
anterior surface. Note any tenderness (the normal liver may be slightly tender).

F I G U R E 1 1 - 1 7 . Palpating ﬁrst at
the costal margin may miss the liver edge.

Firmness or hardness of the liver,
bluntness or rounding of its edge, and
surface irregularity are suspicious for
liver disease.

C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

477

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

On inspiration, the liver is palpable about 3 cm below the right costal margin
in the midclavicular line. Some patients breathe more with the chest than with
the diaphragm. It may be helpful to train such patients to “breathe with the abdomen,” which brings the liver, as well as the spleen and kidneys, into a palpable
position during inspiration.

An obstructed distended gallbladder
may merge with the liver, forming a
firm oval mass below the liver edge
and an area that is dull to percussion.

To palpate the liver edge, you may have to adapt your examining pressure to the
thickness and resistance of the abdominal wall. If you cannot feel the edge, move
your palpating hand closer to the costal margin and try again.
A palpable liver edge does not reliably indicate hepatomegaly.

See Table 11-12, Liver Enlargement:
Apparent and Real, p. 504.

Trace the liver edge both laterally and medially. Palpation through the rectus
muscles is especially difﬁcult. Describe the liver edge, and measure its distance
from the right costal margin in the midclavicular line.
The “hooking technique”. The “hooking technique” may be helpful,
especially when the patient is obese. Stand to the right of the patient’s chest. Place
both hands, side by side, on the right abdomen below the border of liver dullness. Press in with your ﬁngers and up toward the costal margin (Fig. 11-18).
Ask the patient to take a deep breath. The liver edge shown in Figure 11-19 is
palpable with the ﬁngerpads of both hands.

FIGURE 11-18.

The hooking technique.

Assessing Percussion Tenderness of a Nonpalpable Liver. Place your
left hand ﬂat on the lower right rib cage and gently strike your hand with the
ulnar surface of your right ﬁst. Ask the patient to compare the sensation with that
produced by a similar strike on the left side.
478

FIGURE 11-19.
liver edge.

“Hooking” the

Tenderness over the liver suggests
inflammation, found in hepatitis, or
congestion from heart failure.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

The Spleen
When a spleen enlarges, it expands anteriorly, downward, and medially, often
replacing the tympany of stomach and colon with the dullness of a solid organ.
It then becomes palpable below the costal margin. Dullness to percussion suggests splenic enlargement, but may be absent when enlarged spleens lie above
the costal margin. Continue to examine the patient from the patient’s right side.
Percussion. Two techniques may help you to detect splenomegaly, an
enlarged spleen:
■ Percuss the left lower anterior chest wall roughly from the border of cardiac

dullness at the 6th rib to the anterior axillary line and down to the costal
margin, an area termed Traube space. As you percuss along the routes marked
by the arrows in the Figures 11-20 and 11-21, note the lateral extent of tympany. Percussion is moderately accurate in detecting splenomegaly (sensitivity, 60% to 80%; speciﬁcity, 72% to 94%).78

If percussion dullness is present, palpation correctly detects splenomegaly more than 80% of the time.78

Anterior axillary
line
Midaxillary
line
Normal spleen

FIGURE 11-20.

Percuss for splenic dullness.

FIGURE 11-21.
enlargement.

Identify splenic

If tympany is prominent, especially laterally, splenomegaly is unlikely. The
dullness of a normal spleen is usually masked by the dullness of other
posterior tissues.

Fluid or solids in the stomach or colon
may also cause dullness in Traube’
space.

■ Check for a splenic percussion sign. Percuss the lowest interspace in the left

A change in percussion note from
tympany to dullness on inspiration is
a positive splenic percussion sign, but
this sign is only moderately useful for
detecting splenomegaly (Fig. 11-23).

anterior axillary line (Fig. 11-22). This area is usually tympanitic. Then ask
the patient to take a deep breath, and percuss again. When spleen size is
normal, the percussion note usually remains tympanitic.
If either or both of these tests is positive, pay extra attention to palpation of the
spleen.

C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

479

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Percuss
here

Anterior axillary
line
Midaxillary
line
Inspiratory
movement

FIGURE 11-23.
percussion sign.
FIGURE 11-22.

Negative splenic percussion sign.

Palpation. To enhance relaxation of the abdominal wall, the patient should
keep arms at the sides and, if needed, ﬂex the neck and legs. With your left hand,
reach over and around the patient to support and press forward the lower left rib
cage and adjacent soft tissue. With your right hand below the left costal margin,
press in toward the spleen. Begin palpation low enough so that you can detect
an enlarged spleen. If your hand is too close to the costal margin, you will not
be able to reach up under the rib cage.
■ Ask the patient to take a deep breath. Try to feel the tip or edge of the spleen as

it comes down to meet your ﬁngertips (Fig. 11-24). Note any tenderness,
assess the splenic contour, and measure the distance between the spleen’s
lowest point and the left costal margin. Approximately 5% of normal adults
have a palpable spleen tip.

FIGURE 11-24.

480

Positive splenic

Palpate for the splenic edge.

The examiner may miss an enlarged
spleen by starting palpation too high
in the abdomen.
Splenomegaly is eight times more
likely when the spleen is palpable.74
Causes include portal hypertension,
hematologic malignancies, HIV infection, infiltrative diseases like amyloidosis, and splenic infarct or hematoma.
The spleen tip, illustrated in Figure 11-25,
is just palpable deep to the left costal
margin.

F I G U R E 1 1 - 2 5 . Spleen tip
(purple) palpable below costal margin.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

■ Repeat with the patient lying on the right side with legs somewhat ﬂexed at

the hips and knees (Fig. 11-26). In this position, gravity may bring the
spleen forward and to the right into a palpable location (Fig. 11-27).

Umbilicus

F I G U R E 1 1 - 2 6 . Palpate the splenic edge with patient lying on right side.

F I G U R E 1 1 - 2 7 . Edge of
enlarged spleen palpable about 2 cm
below the left costal margin on deep
inspiration.

The Kidneys
Palpation. The kidneys are retroperitoneal and usually not palpable, but
learning the techniques for examination helps you distinguish enlarged kidneys
from other organs and abdominal masses.
Palpation of the Left Kidney. Move to the patient’s left side. Place your
right hand behind the patient, just below and parallel to the 12th rib, with your
ﬁngertips just reaching the CVA. Lift, trying to displace the kidney anteriorly.
Place your left hand gently in the LUQ, lateral and parallel to the rectus muscle.
Ask the patient to take a deep breath. At the peak of inspiration, press your left
hand ﬁrmly and deeply into the LUQ, just below the costal margin. Try to “capture” the kidney between your two hands. Ask the patient to breathe out and
then to stop breathing brieﬂy. Slowly release the pressure of your left hand, feeling at the same time for the kidney to slide back into its expiratory position. If
the kidney is palpable, describe its size, contour, and any tenderness.

A left flank mass can represent either
splenomegaly or an enlarged left kidney. Suspect splenomegaly if there is a
palpable notch on medial border, the
edge extends beyond the midline,
percussion is dull, and your fingers can
probe deep to the medial and lateral
borders but not between the mass and
the costal margin. Confirm these findings with further evaluation.

Alternatively, try to palpate the left kidney using the deep palpation technique similar to palpation of the spleen. Standing at the patient’s right side,
with your left hand, reach over and around the patient to lift up beneath the
left kidney, and with your right hand, feel deep in the LUQ. Ask the patient
to take a deep breath, and feel for a mass. A normal left kidney is rarely palpable.

Suspect an enlarged kidney if there is
normal tympany in the LUQ and you
can probe with your fingers between
the mass and the costal margin, but not
deep to its medial and lower borders.

C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

481

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Palpation of the Right Kidney. A normal right kidney may be palpable,
especially when the patient is thin and the abdominal muscles are relaxed. To
capture the right kidney, return to the patient’s right side. Use your left hand to lift
up from the back, and your right hand to feel deep in the RUQ (Fig. 11-28).
Proceed as before. The kidney may be slightly tender. The patient is usually
aware of a capture and release.

Causes of kidney enlargement include
hydronephrosis, cysts, and tumors.
Bilateral enlargement suggests polycystic kidney disease.

FIGURE 11-28.

Palpate the right kidney.

Occasionally, a right kidney is more anterior and must be distinguished from the
liver. The lower pole of the kidney is rounded, and the liver edge, if palpable,
tends to be sharper, and extends farther medially and laterally. The liver itself
cannot be captured.
Percussion Tenderness of the
Kidneys. If the kidneys are tender to palpation, assess percussion tenderness over
the CVAs. Pressure from your ﬁngertips
may be enough to elicit tenderness; if not,
use ﬁst percussion. Place the ball of one
hand in the CVA and strike it with the ulnar
surface of your ﬁst (Fig. 11-29). Use enough
force to cause a perceptible but painless jar
or thud.

Pain with pressure or fist percussion
supports pyelonephritis if associated
with fever and dysuria, but may also
be musculoskeletal.

To save the patient from repositioning,
integrate this assessment into your examination of the posterior lungs or back.

F I G U R E 1 1 - 2 9 . Percuss for
costovertebral angle tenderness.

482

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

The Bladder
Normally, the bladder is not palpable unless it is distended above the symphysis pubis. Percuss for dullness and the height of the bladder above the symphysis
pubis. Bladder volume must be 400 to 600 mL before dullness appears.74 On
palpation, the dome of the distended bladder feels smooth and round. Check for
tenderness.

Causes of bladder distention are outlet obstruction from a urethral stricture or prostatic hyperplasia,
medication side effects, and neurologic disorders such as stroke or multiple sclerosis.
Suprapubic tenderness is common in
bladder infection.

The Aorta
Press ﬁrmly deep in the epigastrium, slightly to the left of the midline, and
identify the aortic pulsations. In adults over age 50 years, assess the width of
the aorta by pressing deeply in the upper abdomen with one hand on each side
of the aorta (Figs. 11-30 to 11-32). In this age group, a normal aorta is not more
than 3 cm wide (average, 2.5 cm, excluding the thickness of the skin and
abdominal wall). Detection of pulsations is affected by abdominal girth and the
diameter of the aorta.

Risk factors for AAA are age ≥65 years,
history of smoking, male gender, and
a first-degree relative with a history of
AAA repair.79

A periumbilical or upper abdominal
mass with expansile pulsations that is
≥3 cm in diameter suggests an AAA.
Sensitivity of palpation increases
as AAAs enlarge: for widths of 3 to
3.9 cm, 29%; 4 to 4.9 cm, 50%; ≥5 cm,
76%.79,80

F I G U R E 1 1 - 3 0 . Press ﬁrmly to
detect aortic pulsations.

F I G U R E 1 1 - 3 1 . Identify
expanded aortic width.

Screening by palpation followed by
ultrasound decreases mortality, especially in male smokers 65 years or
older. Pain may signal rupture. Rupture is 15 times more likely in AAAs
>4 cm than in smaller aneurysms,
and carries an 85% to 90% mortality
rate.79,80
Note that the USPSTF recommends
ultrasound screening for men over
65 years who have “ever smoked.”81

FIGURE 11-32.

Palpate on both sides of the aorta.

C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

483

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

Special Techniques
Assessment Techniques for
Ascites
Appendicitis
● Acute cholecystitis
● Ventral hernia
● Mass in abdominal wall
●
●

Assessing
Possible
Ascites. A
protuberant
abdomen with bulging ﬂanks is
suspicious for ascites, the most
common complication of
cirrhosis.82 Because ascitic ﬂuid
characteristically sinks with
gravity, whereas gas-ﬁlled loops of
bowel rise, dullness appears in
the dependent areas of the
abdomen. Percuss for dullness
outward in several directions
from the central area of tympany.
Map the border between tympany
and dullness (Fig. 11-33).

Tympany
Dullness

Ascites reflects the increased hydrostatic pressure in cirrhosis (the most
common cause of ascites), heart failure, constrictive pericarditis, or inferior
vena cava or hepatic vein obstruction.
It may signal decreased osmotic pressure in nephrotic syndrome, malnutrition, or ovarian cancer.

F I G U R E 1 1 - 3 3 . Percuss outward to map
dullness from ascites.

Two additional techniques help to conﬁrm ascites, although both signs may be
misleading.
■ Test for shifting dullness. Percuss the border of tympany and dullness with the

patient supine, then ask the patient to roll onto one side. Percuss and mark
the borders again (Fig. 11-34). In a person without ascites, the border
between tympany and dullness usually stays relatively constant.

In ascites, dullness shifts to the more
dependent side, whereas tympany
shifts to the top.

Tympany

Shifting dullness

FIGURE 11-34.

484

Percuss for shifting dullness (here patient turned to right side).

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Test for a ﬂuid wave. Ask the patient or an assistant to press the edges of both

hands ﬁrmly down the midline of the abdomen. This pressure helps to stop
the transmission wave through fat. While you tap one ﬂank sharply with
your ﬁngertips, feel on the opposite ﬂank for an impulse transmitted through
the ﬂuid (Fig. 11-35). Unfortunately, this sign is often negative until ascites
is obvious, and it is sometimes positive in people without ascites.

FIGURE 11-35.

An easily palpable impulse suggests
ascites. A positive fluid wave, shifting
dullness, and peripheral edema makes
the presence of ascites to three to six
times more likely.83

Test for a ﬂuid wave.

Identifying an Organ or a Mass in an Ascitic Abdomen. Try to ballotte
the organ or mass, exempliﬁed here by an enlarged liver (Fig. 11-36). Straighten
and stiffen the ﬁngers of one hand together, place them on the abdominal surface,
and make a brief jabbing movement directly toward the anticipated structure.
This quick movement often displaces the ﬂuid so that your ﬁngertips can brieﬂy
touch the surface of the structure through the abdominal wall (Fig. 11-37).

F I G U R E 1 1 - 3 6 . Note the
enlarged liver.

FIGURE 11-37.
the liver.

Ballotte

Assessing Possible Appendicitis. Appendicitis is a common cause of
acute abdominal pain. Assess carefully for the peritoneal signs of acute abdomen
and the additional signs of McBurney point tenderness, Rovsing sign, the psoas
sign, and the obturator sign described on the next page.

Appendicitis is twice as likely in the
presence of RLQ tenderness, Rovsing
sign, and the psoas sign; it is three
times more likely if there is McBurney
point tenderness.73

C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

485

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Ask the patient to point to where the pain began and where it is now. Ask the

patient to cough to see where pain occurs.

■ Palpate carefully for an area of local tenderness. Classically, “McBurney

point” lies 2 inches from the anterior superior spinous process of ilium on
a line drawn from that process to the umbilicus (Fig. 11-38).

The pain of appendicitis classically
begins near the umbilicus, then
migrates to the RLQ. Older adults are
less likely to report this pattern.17
Localized tenderness anywhere in the
RLQ, even in the right flank, suggests
appendicitis.

Just below the
middle of a line
joining the
umbilicus and the
anterior superior
iliac spine
(McBurney point)

FIGURE 11-38.

McBurney point.

■ Palpate the tender area for guarding, rigidity, and rebound tenderness.

Early voluntary guarding may be
replaced by involuntary muscular
rigidity and signs of peritoneal inflammation. There may also be RLQ pain
on quick withdrawal or deferred
rebound tenderness.

■ Palpate for Rovsing sign and referred rebound tenderness. Press deeply and

Pain in the RLQ during left-sided pressure is a positive Rovsing sign.

evenly in the LLQ. Then quickly withdraw your ﬁngers.
■ Assess the psoas sign. Place your hand just above the patient’s right knee and ask

the patient to raise that thigh against your hand. Alternatively, ask the patient to
turn onto the left side. Then extend the patient’s right leg at the hip. Flexion of
the leg at the hip makes the psoas muscle contract; extension stretches it.
■ Though less helpful, assess the obturator sign. Flex the patient’s right thigh at

the hip, with the knee bent, and rotate the leg internally at the hip. This
maneuver stretches the internal obturator muscle. Internal rotation of the
hip is described on p. 681.
■ Perform a rectal examination and, in women, a pelvic examination. These ma-

neuvers have low sensitivity and speciﬁcity, but they may identify an inﬂamed appendix atypically located within the pelvic cavity or other causes
of the abdominal pain.
Assessing Possible Acute Cholecystitis. When RUQ pain and
tenderness suggest acute cholecystitis, assess Murphy sign. Hook your left thumb
or the ﬁngers of your right hand under the costal margin at the point where the
lateral border of the rectus muscle intersects with the costal margin. Alternatively,
palpate the RUQ with the ﬁngers of your right hand near the costal margin. If the
liver is enlarged, hook your thumb or ﬁngers under the liver edge at a comparable
point. Ask the patient to take a deep breath, which forces the liver and gall
486

Increased abdominal pain on either
maneuver is a positive psoas sign, suggesting irritation of the psoas muscle
by an inflamed appendix.
Right hypogastric pain is a positive obturator sign, from irritation of the obturator muscle by an inflamed appendix.
This sign has very low sensitivity.
Right-sided rectal tenderness may
also be caused by an inflamed adnexa
or seminal vesicle.

A sharp increase in tenderness with
inspiratory effort is a positive Murphy sign. When positive, Murphy
sign triples the likelihood of acute
cholecystitis.73

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

bladder down toward the examining ﬁngers. Watch the patient’s breathing and
note the degree of tenderness.
Assessing Ventral Hernias. Ventral hernias are hernias in the abdominal
wall exclusive of groin hernias. If you suspect but do not see an umbilical or
incisional hernia, ask the patient to raise both head and shoulders off the table.

The bulge of a hernia will usually
appear with this action, but should
not be confused with diastasis recti,
which is a benign 2- to 3-cm gap in
the rectus muscles often seen in
obese and postpartum patients.

Inguinal and femoral hernias are discussed in Chapter 13, Male Genitalia and
Hernias.
Strangulated inguinal, femoral, or scrotal hernias merit prompt surgical evaluation. See discussion of strangulated scrotal hernias on pp. 554–555.
Mass in the Abdominal Wall. Occasionally, there are masses in the
abdominal wall rather than inside the abdominal cavity. Ask the patient either to
raise the head and shoulders or to strain down, thus tightening the abdominal
muscles. Feel for the mass again.

A mass in the abdominal wall remains
palpable; an intra-abdominal mass is
obscured by muscular contraction.

Recording Your Findings
Note that initially you may use sentences to describe your ﬁndings; later you will
use phrases. The style below contains phrases appropriate for most write-ups.
Recording the Abdominal Examination
“Abdomen is protuberant with active bowel sounds. It is soft and nontender; no
palpable masses or hepatosplenomegaly. Liver span is 7 cm in the right midclavicular line; edge is smooth and palpable 1 cm below the right costal margin.
Spleen and kidneys not felt. No costovertebral angle (CVA) tenderness.”
OR
“Abdomen is ﬂat. No bowel sounds heard. It is ﬁrm and boardlike, with
increased tenderness, guarding, and rebound in the right midquadrant. Liver
percusses to 7 cm in the midclavicular line; edge not felt. Spleen and kidneys
not felt. No palpable masses. No CVA tenderness.

These findings suggest peritonitis
from possible appendicitis (see
pp. 485–486 and pp. 488–489).

C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

487

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 11-1 Abdominal Pain
Problem84

Process

Location

Quality

Gastroesophageal
Reﬂux Disease
(GERD)11,14

Prolonged exposure of esophagus to
gastric acid due to impaired esophageal motility or excess relaxations of
the lower esophageal sphincter; Helicobacter pylori may be present

Chest or epigastric

Heartburn, regurgitation

Peptic Ulcer and
Dyspepsia3,5

Mucosal ulcer in stomach or duodenum >5 mm, covered with ﬁbrin, extending through the muscularis mucosa; H. pylori infection present in
90% of peptic ulcers

Epigastric, may radiate straight to the
back

Variable: epigastric gnawing
or burning (dyspepsia);
may also be boring, aching,
or hungerlike

Gastric Cancer

Adenocarcinoma in 90%–95%, either
intestinal (older adults) or diffuse
(younger adults, worse prognosis)

Increasingly in “cardia” and GE junction; also in distal stomach

Variable

Acute Appendicitis17,18

Acute inﬂammation of the appendix
with distention or obstruction

Poorly localized periumbilical pain,
usually migrates to the right lower
quadrant

Mild but increasing, possibly cramping

10

No symptoms in up to
20%

Steady and more severe

Acute Cholecystitis

Inﬂammation of the gallbladder, from
obstruction of the cystic duct by gallstone in 90%

Right upper quadrant or epigastrium;
may radiate to right shoulder or interscapular area

Steady, aching

Biliary Colic

Sudden obstruction of the cystic duct
or common bile duct by a gallstone

Epigastric or right upper quadrant;
may radiate to the right scapula and
shoulder

Steady, aching; not colicky

Acute Pancreatitis7,9

Intrapancreatic trypsinogen activation
to trypsin and other enzymes, resulting in autodigestion and inﬂammation
of the pancreas

Epigastric, may radiate straight to the
back or other areas of the abdomen;
20% with severe sequelae of organ
failure

Usually steady

Chronic Pancreatitis

Irreversible destruction of the pancreatic
parenchyma from recurrent inﬂammation of either large ducts or small ducts

Epigastric, radiating to the back

Severe, persistent, deep

Pancreatic Cancer85,86

Predominantly adenocarcinoma
(95%); 5% 5-yr survival

If cancer in body or tail, epigastric, in
either upper quadrant, often radiates to
the back

Steady, deep

Acute Diverticulitis87

Acute inﬂammation of colonic diverticula, outpouchings 5–10 mm in diameter, usually in sigmoid or descending colon

Left lower quadrant

May be cramping at ﬁrst,
then steady

Acute Bowel
Obstruction

Obstruction of the bowel lumen, most
commonly caused by (1) adhesions or
hernias (small bowel), or (2) cancer or
diverticulitis (colon)

Small bowel: periumbilical or upper
abdominal

Cramping

Colon: lower abdominal or generalized

Cramping

Occlusion of blood ﬂow to small
bowel, from arterial or venous thrombosis (especially superior mesenteric
artery), cardiac embolus, or hypoperfusion; can be colonic

May be periumbilical at ﬁrst, then
diffuse; may be postprandial,
classically inducing “food fear”

Cramping at ﬁrst, then
steady; pain disproportionate to examination ﬁndings

Mesenteric
Ischemia88,89

488

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Usually last longer than
3 hrs

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Associated Symptoms
and Setting

Timing

Aggravating Factors

Relieving Factors

After meals, especially spicy
foods

Lying down, bending over;
physical activity; diseases such
as scleroderma, gastroparesis;
drugs like nicotine that relax the
lower esophageal sphincter

Antacids, proton pump inhibitors; avoiding alcohol, smoking,
fatty meals, chocolate, selected
drugs such as theophylline, calcium channel blockers

Wheezing, chronic cough, shortness of breath, hoarseness, choking
sensation, dysphagia, regurgitation,
halitosis, sore throat; increases risk
of Barrett esophagus and esophageal cancer

Intermittent; duodenal ulcer is
more likely than gastric ulcer
or dyspepsia to cause pain that
(1) wakes the patient at night,
and (2) occurs intermittently
over a few wks, disappears for
months, then recurs

Variable

Food and antacids may bring relief (less likely in gastric ulcers)

Nausea, vomiting, belching, bloating;
heartburn (more common in duodenal
ulcer); weight loss (more common in
gastric ulcer); dyspepsia is more common in the young (20–29 yrs), gastric
ulcer in those over 50 yrs, and duodenal
ulcer in those 30–60 yrs

Pain is persistent, slowly progressive; duration of pain is typically shorter than in peptic ulcer

Often food; H. pylori infection

Not relieved by food or antacids

Anorexia, nausea, early satiety, weight
loss, and sometimes bleeding; most
common in ages 50–70 yrs

Lasts roughly 4–6 hrs, depending on intervention

Movement or cough

If it subsides temporarily,
suspect perforation of the
appendix.

Anorexia, nausea, possibly vomiting,
which typically follow the onset of
pain; low fever

Gradual onset; course longer
than in biliary colic

Jarring, deep breathing

Anorexia, nausea, vomiting, fever;
no jaundice

Rapid onset over a few min, lasts
one to several hrs and subsides
gradually; often recurrent

Fatty meals but also fasting;
often precedes cholecystitis,
cholangitis, pancreatitis

Anorexia, nausea, vomiting, restlessness

Acute onset, persistent pain

Lying supine; dyspnea if pleural
effusions from capillary leak syndrome; selected medications,
high triglycerides may exacerbate

Leaning forward with trunk
ﬂexed

Nausea, vomiting, abdominal distention, fever; often recurrent; 80%
with history of alcohol abuse or
gallstones

Chronic or recurrent course

Alcohol, heavy or fatty meals

Possibly leaning forward with
trunk ﬂexed; often intractable

Pancreatic enzyme insufﬁciency,
diarrhea with fatty stools (steatorrhea) and diabetes mellitus

Persistent pain; relentlessly
progressive illness

Smoking, chronic pancreatitis

Possibly leaning forward with
trunk ﬂexed; often intractable

Painless jaundice, anorexia, weight
loss; glucose intolerance, depression

Analgesia, bowel rest, antibiotics

Fever, constipation. Also nausea,
vomiting, abdominal mass with
rebound tenderness

Often gradual onset

Paroxysmal; may decrease as
bowel mobility is impaired

Ingestion of food or liquids

Vomiting of bile and mucus (high
obstruction) or fecal material (low
obstruction); obstipation develops
(early); vomiting late if at all; prior
symptoms of underlying cause

Underlying cardiac disease

Vomiting, bloody stool, soft distended abdomen with peritoneal
signs, shock; age >50 yrs

Paroxysmal, though typically
milder
Usually abrupt in onset, then
persistent

C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

489

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 11-2 Dysphagia
Process and
Problem
Oropharyngeal
Dysphagia

Timing
Acute or gradual onset
and a variable course,
depending on the
underlying disorder

Factors That
Aggravate

Factors That
Relieve

Attempts to start the
swallowing process

Associated
Symptoms and
Conditions
Aspiration into the
lungs or regurgitation
into the nose with
attempts to swallow;
from motor disorders
affecting the
pharyngeal muscles
such as stroke, bulbar
palsy, or other
neuromuscular
conditions

Esophageal Dysphagia
Mechanical Narrowing
Mucosal rings and webs Intermittent

Solid foods

Regurgitation of the
bolus of food

Usually none

Esophageal stricture

Intermittent; may
become slowly
progressive

Solid foods

Regurgitation of the
bolus of food

A long history of
heartburn and
regurgitation

Esophageal cancer

May be intermittent at
ﬁrst; progressive over
months

Solid foods, with
progression to liquids

Regurgitation of the
bolus of food

Pain in the chest and
back and weight loss,
especially late in the
course of illness

Intermittent

Solids or liquids

Maneuvers described
below; sometimes
nitroglycerin

Chest pain that mimics
angina pectoris or
myocardial infarction
and lasts min to hrs;
possibly heartburn

Scleroderma

Intermittent; may
progress slowly

Solids or liquids

Heartburn; other
manifestations of
scleroderma

Achalasia

Intermittent; may
progress

Solids or liquids

Repeated swallowing;
movements such as
straightening the back,
raising the arms, or a
Valsalva maneuver
(straining down
against a closed
glottis)

Motor Disorders
Diffuse esophageal
spasm

490

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Regurgitation, often at
night when lying
down, with nocturnal
cough; possibly chest
pain precipitated by
eating

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 11-3 Diarrhea
Problem

Characteristics
of Stool

Process

Acute Diarrhea90 (Ä14 days)
Infection by viSecretory
Infection (Non- ruses, preformed
bacterial toxins
inﬂammatory)
(such as Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus cereus, Clostridium perfringens,
toxigenic Escherichia coli, Vibrio
cholerae), cryptosporidium, Giardia
lamblia, rotavirus

Timing

Associated
Symptoms

Setting,
Persons at
Risk

Watery, without blood,
pus, or mucus

Duration of a few
days, possibly longer; lactase deﬁciency may lead to
a longer course

Nausea, vomiting,
periumbilical
cramping pain;
temperature normal or slightly
elevated

Often travel, a
common food
source, or an
epidemic

Inﬂammatory
Infection

Colonization or invasion of intestinal
mucosa (nontyphoid Salmonella,
Shigella, Yersinia,
Campylobacter, enteropathic E. coli,
Entamoeba histolytica, C. difﬁcile)

Loose to watery, often
with blood, pus, or
mucus

An acute illness of
varying duration

Lower abdominal
cramping pain and
often rectal urgency, tenesmus;
fever

Travel, contaminated food or
water; frequent
anal intercourse

Drug-Induced
Diarrhea

Action of many
drugs, such as
magnesium-containing antacids,
antibiotics, antineoplastic agents,
and laxatives

Loose to watery

Acute, recurrent,
or chronic

Possibly nausea;
usually little if any
pain

Prescribed or
over-the-counter
medications

Loose; ∼50% with
mucus; small to moderate volume. Small,
hard stools with constipation. May be
mixed pattern.

Worse in the
morning; rarely at
night.

Crampy lower abdominal pain, abdominal distention, ﬂatulence,
nausea; urgency,
pain relieved with
defecation

Young and
middle-aged
adults, especially women

Chronic Diarrhea (ê30 days)
Diarrheal Syndrome
Irritable bowel
Altered motility or
syndrome20
secretion from luminal and mucosal
irritants that
change mucosal
permeability, immune activation,
and colonic transit,
including maldigested carbohydrates, fats, excess
bile acids, gluten
intolerance, enteroendocrine signaling, and changes in
microbiomes

(continued)
C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

491

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 11-3 Diarrhea (Continued )
Problem

Characteristics
of Stool

Process

Chronic Diarrhea (ê30 days) (continued)
Partial obstruction Loose, small volume
by impacted stool
only allowing passage of loose feces

Fecal impaction/
motility disorders

Cancer of the sigmoid colon

Partial obstruction
by a malignant
neoplasm

Inﬂammatory Bowel Disease
Ulcerative colitis
Mucosal inﬂammation typically
extending proximally from the rectum (proctitis) to
varying lengths of
the colon (colitis to
pancolitis), with
microulcerations
and, if chronic, inﬂammatory polyps
Crohn disease of
the small bowel
(regional enteritis)
or colon (granulomatous colitis)

492

Chronic transmural inﬂammation
of the bowel wall,
with skip pattern
involving the terminal ileum and/
or proximal colon
(and rectal sparing); may cause
strictures

Timing

Associated
Symptoms

Setting,
Persons at
Risk

Variable

Crampy abdominal pain, incomplete evacuation

Older adults,
immobilized
and institutionalized patients;
ensues from selected medications

May be blood-streaked

Variable

Change in usual
bowel habits,
crampy lower abdominal pain, constipation

Middle-aged
and older
adults, especially older than
55 yrs

Frequent, watery, often
containing blood

Onset typically
abrupt; often recurrent, persisting,
and may awaken
at night

Cramping, with
urgency, tenesmus;
fever, fatigue,
weakness; abdominal pain if complicated by toxic
megacolon; may
include episcleritis, uveitis, arthritis, erythema nodosum

Often young
adults, Ashkenazi Jewish descendants;
linked to altered
CD4+ T-cell Th2
response; increases risk of
colon cancer

Small, soft to loose or
watery, with bleeding
if colitis, obstructive
symptoms, if enteritis

More insidious
onset; chronic or
recurrent

Crampy periumbilical, right lower
quadrant (enteritis)
or diffuse (colitis)
pain, with anorexia, fever, and/
or weight loss;
perianal or perirectal abscesses
and ﬁstulas; may
cause small or
large bowel obstruction

Often teens or
young adults,
but also adults
of middle age;
more common
in Ashkenazi
Jewish descendants; linked to
altered CD4+ Tcell helper Th1
and 17 response; increases risk of
colon cancer

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Problem

Characteristics
of Stool

Process

Timing

Associated
Symptoms

Setting,
Persons at
Risk

Chronic Diarrhea (ê30 days) (continued)
Voluminous Diarrhea
Malabsorption
Defective memsyndrome
brane transport or
absorption of intestinal epithelium
(Crohn, celiac disease, surgical resection); impaired luminal digestion
(pancreatic insufﬁciency); epithelial
defects at brush
border (lactose intolerance)

Typically bulky, soft,
light yellow to gray,
mushy, greasy or oily,
and sometimes frothy;
particularly foul-smelling; usually ﬂoats in
toilet (steatorrhea)

Onset of illness
typically insidious

Anorexia, weight
loss, fatigue, abdominal distention, often crampy
lower abdominal
pain. Symptoms of
nutritional deﬁciencies such as
bleeding (vitamin
K), bone pain and
fractures (vitamin
D), glossitis (vitamin B), and edema
(protein)

Variable, depending on
cause

Intestinal lactase
deﬁciency

Watery diarrhea of
large volume

Follows the ingestion of milk and
milk products; relieved by fasting

Crampy abdominal pain, abdominal distention, ﬂatulence

In >50% of African Americans,
Asians, Native
Americans,
Hispanics; in
5–20% of
Caucasians

Abuse of
osmotic
purgatives

Laxative habit,
often surreptitious

Watery diarrhea of
large volume

Variable

Often none

Persons with anorexia nervosa
or bulimia nervosa

Secretory diarrhea

Variable: bacterial
infection, secreting
villous adenoma,
fat or bile salt
malabsorption,
hormone-mediated
conditions (gastrin
in Zollinger–Ellison
syndrome,
vasoactive
intestinal peptide)

Watery diarrhea of
large volume

Variable

Weight loss,
dehydration,
nausea, vomiting,
and cramping
abdominal pain

Variable
depending on
cause

Osmotic diarrhea
Lactose
intolerance

■

■

C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

493

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 11-4 Constipation
Process

Associated Symptoms
and Setting

Inadequate Time or Setting for
the Defecation Reﬂex

Ignoring the sensation of a full rectum
inhibits the defecation reﬂex

Hectic schedules, unfamiliar
surroundings, bed rest

False Expectations of Bowel
Habits

Expectations of “regularity” or more
frequent stools than a person’s norm

Beliefs, treatments, and advertisements
that promote the use of laxatives

Diet Deﬁcient in Fiber

Decreased fecal bulk

Other factors such as debilitation and
constipating drugs may contribute

Irritable Bowel Syndrome20

Functional change in frequency or form
of bowel movement without known
pathology; possibly from change in
intestinal bacteria.

Three patterns: diarrhea—predominant,
constipation—predominant, or mixed.
Symptoms present ≥6 mo and
abdominal pain for ≥3 mo plus at least
2 of 3 features (improvement with
defecation; onset with change in stool
frequency; onset with change in stool
form and appearance)

Progressive narrowing of the bowel
lumen from adenocarcinoma

Change in bowel habits; often diarrhea,
abdominal pain, bleeding, occult blood
in stool; in rectal cancer, tenesmus and
pencil-shaped stools; weight loss

Fecal Impaction

A large, ﬁrm, immovable fecal mass,
most often in the rectum

Rectal fullness, abdominal pain, and
diarrhea around the impaction;
common in debilitated, bedridden, and
often elderly and institutionalized
patients

Other Obstructing Lesions
(such as Diverticulitis, Volvulus,
Intussusception, or Hernia)

Narrowing or complete obstruction of
the bowel

Colicky abdominal pain, abdominal
distention, and in intussusception, often
“currant jelly” stools (red blood and
mucus)

Painful Anal Lesions

Pain may cause spasm of the external
sphincter and voluntary inhibition of
the defecation reﬂex.

Anal ﬁssures, painful hemorrhoids,
perirectal abscesses

Drugs

A variety of mechanisms

Opiates, anticholinergics, antacids
containing calcium or aluminum, and
many others

Depression

A disorder of mood

Fatigue, anhedonia, sleep disturbance,
weight loss

Neurologic Disorders

Interference with the autonomic
innervation of the bowel

Spinal cord injuries, multiple sclerosis,
Hirschsprung disease, and other
conditions

Metabolic Conditions

Interference with bowel motility

Pregnancy, hypothyroidism,
hypercalcemia

Problem
Life Activities and Habits

Mechanical Obstruction
Cancer of the Rectum or
Sigmoid Colon

494

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 11-5 Black and Bloody Stool
Problem

Selected Causes

Melena
Refers to passage of black tarry stool
Fecal blood tests are positive
Involves loss ≥60 mL of blood into the
gastrointestinal tract (less in children),
usually from the esophagus, stomach, or
duodenum with transit time of 7–14 hrs

Associated Symptoms and
Setting

Gastritis, GERD, peptic ulcer (gastric or
duodenal)

Usually epigastric discomfort from
heartburn, dysmotility; if peptic ulcer,
pain after meals (delay of 2–3 hrs if
duodenal ulcer; may be asymptomatic

Gastritis or stress ulcers

Recent ingestion of alcohol, aspirin, or
other anti-inﬂammatory drugs; recent
bodily trauma, severe burns, surgery, or
increased intracranial pressure

Less commonly, if slow transit, blood loss
originates in the jejunum, ileum, or
ascending colon

Esophageal or gastric varices

Cirrhosis of the liver or other causes of
portal hypertension

In infants, melena may result from
swallowing blood during the birth

Reﬂux esophagitis, Mallory–Weiss tear
in esophageal mucosa due to retching
and vomiting

Retching, vomiting, often recent
ingestion of alcohol

Ingestion of iron, bismuth salts, licorice,
or even chocolate cookies

Asymptomatic

Black Stool
Black stool from other causes with
negative fecal blood tests; stool change
has no pathologic signiﬁcance

Stool with Red Blood (Hematochezia)
Usually originates in the colon, rectum,
Colon cancer
or anus; much less frequently from the
Hyperplasia or adenomatous polyps
jejunum or ileum
Diverticula of the colon
Upper gastrointestinal hemorrhage may
also cause red stool, usually with large
blood loss ≥1 L
Rapid transit leaves insufﬁcient time for
Inﬂammatory conditions of the colon
the blood to turn black from oxidation
and rectum
of iron in hemoglobin
Ulcerative colitis, Crohn disease
Infectious diarrhea
Proctitis (various causes including
anal intercourse)

Reddish but Nonbloody Stool

Often a change in bowel habits, weight loss
Often no other symptoms
Often no symptoms unless
inﬂammation causes diverticulitis

See Table 11-3, Diarrhea, p. 492
See Table 11-3, Diarrhea, p. 491
Rectal urgency, tenesmus

Ischemic colitis

Lower abdominal pain, sometimes fever
or shock in older adults; abdomen
typically soft to palpation

Hemorrhoids

Blood on the toilet paper, on the surface
of the stool, or dripping into the toilet

Anal ﬁssure

Blood on the toilet paper or on the
surface of the stool; anal pain

Ingestion of beets

Pink urine, which usually precedes the
reddish stool; from poor metabolism of
betacyanin

C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

495

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 11-6 Urinary Frequency, Nocturia, and Polyuria
Problem

Mechanisms

Selected Causes

Associated Symptoms

Frequency

Decreased bladder capacity
Increased bladder sensitivity to
stretch because of inﬂammation

Infection, stones, tumor, or foreign
body in the bladder

Burning on urination, urinary
urgency, sometimes gross hematuria

Decreased elasticity of the
bladder wall

Inﬁltration by scar tissue or tumor

Symptoms of associated inﬂammation (see above) are common

Decreased cortical inhibition of
bladder contractions

Motor disorders of the central
nervous system, such as a stroke

Urinary urgency; neurologic symptoms such as weakness and paralysis

Partial mechanical obstruction
of the bladder neck or proximal
urethra

Most commonly, benign prostatic
hyperplasia; also urethral stricture
and other obstructive lesions of the
bladder or prostate

Prior obstructive symptoms: hesitancy
in starting the urinary stream, straining
to void, reduced size and force of the
stream, and dribbling during or at the
end of urination

Loss of S2–S4 innervation to
the bladder

Neurologic disease affecting the
sacral nerves or nerve roots, e.g.,
diabetic neuropathy

Weakness or sensory defects

Decreased concentrating ability of
the kidney with loss of the normal
drop in nocturnal urine output

Chronic renal insufﬁciency due to
a number of diseases

Possibly other symptoms of renal
insufﬁciency

Excessive ﬂuid intake before
bedtime

Habit, especially involving alcohol
and coffee

Fluid-retaining, edematous states.
Daytime accumulation of
dependent edema that is excreted
at night when the patient is supine

Heart failure, nephrotic syndrome,
hepatic cirrhosis with ascites,
chronic venous insufﬁciency

Edema and other symptoms of the
underlying disorder; urinary output
during the day may be reduced as
ﬂuid accumulates in the body tissues
(see Table 12-1, Peripheral Causes of
Edema, p. 534).

Voiding while up at night without
a real urge, a “pseudofrequency”

Insomnia

Variable

Deﬁciency of antidiuretic hormone
(diabetes insipidus)

A disorder of the posterior
pituitary and hypothalamus

Thirst and polydipsia, often severe
and persistent; nocturia

Renal unresponsiveness to
antidiuretic hormone (nephrogenic
diabetes insipidus)

A number of kidney diseases,
including hypercalcemic and
hypokalemic nephropathy; drug
toxicity, e.g., from lithium

Thirst and polydipsia, often severe
and persistent; nocturia

Electrolytes, such as sodium
salts

Large saline infusions, potent
diuretics, certain kidney diseases

Variable

Nonelectrolytes, such as glucose

Uncontrolled diabetes mellitus

Thirst, polydipsia, and nocturia

Primary polydipsia

Polydipsia tends to be episodic;
thirst may not be present; nocturia is
usually absent

Impaired bladder emptying with
residual urine in the bladder

Nocturia
With High Volumes

With Low Volumes

Polyuria

Most types of polyuria (see p. 462)

Urinary frequency

Solute diuresis

Excessive water intake

496

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 11-7 Urinary Incontinence
Problem

a

Mechanisms

Symptoms

Physical Signs

In women, pelvic ﬂoor
weakness and inadequate
muscular and ligamentous
support of the bladder neck
and proximal urethra change
the angle between the bladder
and the urethra (see Chapter 14,
pp. 592–593). Causes include
childbirth and surgery. Local
conditions affecting the
internal urethral sphincter,
such as postmenopausal
atrophy of the mucosa and
urethral infection, may also
contribute.

Momentary leakage of small
amounts of urine with
coughing, laughing, and
sneezing while the person is
in an upright position. Urine
loss is unrelated to a
conscious urge to urinate.

Stress incontinence may be
demonstrable, especially if
the patient is examined
before voiding and in a
standing position.
Atrophic vaginitis may be
evident. Bladder distention is
absent.

Decreased cortical inhibition
of detrusor contractions from
stroke, brain tumor, dementia,
and lesions of the spinal cord
above the sacral level.

Involuntary urine loss
preceded by an urge to void.
The volume tends to be
moderate.

The small bladder is not
detectable on abdominal
examination.

Hyperexcitability of sensory
pathways, as in bladder
infections, tumors, and fecal
impaction.

Urgency, frequency, and
nocturia with small to
moderate volumes.
If acute inﬂammation is
present, pain on urination.

When cortical inhibition is
decreased, mental deﬁcits or
motor signs of central
nervous system disease are
often present.

Deconditioning of voiding
reﬂexes, as in frequent
voluntary voiding at low
bladder volumes.

Possibly “pseudo-stress
incontinence”—voiding
10–20 sec after stresses such
as a change of position, going
up- or downstairs, and
possibly coughing, laughing,
or sneezing.

When sensory pathways are
hyperexcitable, signs of local
pelvic problems or a fecal
impaction may be present.

Stress Incontinence
The urethral sphincter is
weakened so that transient
increases in intra-abdominal
pressure raise the bladder
pressure to levels that exceed
urethral resistance.

In men, stress incontinence
may follow prostate surgery.

Urge Incontinence
Detrusor contractions are
stronger than normal and
overcome the normal urethral
resistance. The bladder is
typically small.

(continued)

C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

497

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 11-7 Urinary Incontinence (Continued )
a

Problem

Mechanisms

Symptoms

Physical Signs

Obstruction of the bladder
outlet, as in benign prostatic
hyperplasia or tumor.

When intravesicular pressure
overcomes urethral resistance,
continuous dripping or
dribbling incontinence ensues.

Examination often reveals an
enlarged, sometimes tender,
bladder. Other signs include
prostatic enlargement, motor
signs of peripheral nerve
disease, a decrease in
sensation (including perineal
sensation), and diminished
to absent reﬂexes.

Overﬂow Incontinence
Detrusor contractions are
insufﬁcient to overcome
urethral resistance, causing
urinary retention. The bladder
is typically ﬂaccid and large,
even after an effort to void.

Weakness of the detrusor
muscle associated with
peripheral nerve disease at
S2–4 level.
Impaired bladder sensation
that interrupts the reﬂex arc,
as in diabetic neuropathy.

Functional Incontinence
The patient is functionally
unable to reach the toilet in
time because of impaired
health or environmental
conditions.

Incontinence Secondary
to Medications
Drugs may contribute to any
type of incontinence listed.

Decreased force of the
urinary stream.
Prior symptoms of partial
urinary obstruction or other
symptoms of peripheral
nerve disease may be present.

Problems in mobility
resulting from weakness,
arthritis, poor vision, or
other conditions.
Environmental factors such
as an unfamiliar setting,
distant bathroom facilities,
bed rails, or physical
restraints.

Incontinence on the way to
the toilet or only in the early
morning.

The bladder is not detectable
on examination. Look for
physical or environmental
clues as the likely cause.

Sedatives, tranquilizers,
anticholinergics, sympathetic
blockers, and potent
diuretics.

Variable. A careful history
and chart review are
important.

Variable.

a

Patients may have more than one kind of incontinence.

498

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 11-8 Localized Bulges in the Abdominal Wall
Localized bulges in the abdominal wall include ventral hernias (defects in the wall through which tissue protrudes) and
subcutaneous tumors such as lipomas. The more common ventral hernias are umbilical, incisional, and epigastric. Hernias and
diastasis recti usually become more evident when the patient is supine and raises the head and shoulders.

Umbilical Hernia
A protrusion through a
defective umbilical ring is
most common in infants but
also occurs in adults. In
infants, it usually closes
spontaneously within 1–2 yrs.

Diastasis Recti
Separation of the two rectus abdominis muscles, through
which abdominal contents form a midline ridge typically
extending from the xiphoid to the umbilicus and seen only
when the patient raises the head and shoulders. Often present
in patients with repeated pregnancies, obesity, and chronic
lung disease. It is clinically benign.
Ridge

Incisional Hernia
This is a protrusion through
an operative scar. Palpate to
detect the length and width of
the defect in the abdominal
wall. A small defect, through
which a large hernia has
passed, has a greater risk for
complications than a large
defect.

Epigastric Hernia
A small midline protrusion
through a defect in the linea
alba occurs between the
xiphoid process and the
umbilicus. With the patient
coughing or performing a
Valsalva maneuver, palpate by
running your ﬁngerpad down
the linea alba.

Lipoma
Common, benign, fatty tumors
usually in the subcutaneous tissues
almost anywhere in the body,
including the abdominal wall.
Small or large, they are usually soft
and often lobulated. Press your
ﬁnger down on the edge of a
lipoma. The tumor typically slips
out from under your ﬁnger and is
well demarcated, nonreducible,
and usually nontender.

C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

499

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 11-9 Protuberant Abdomens

Tympany

Dullness

Fat
Fat is the most common
cause of a protuberant
abdomen. Fat thickens the
abdominal wall, the
mesentery, and omentum.
The umbilicus may appear
sunken. A pannus, or apron
of fatty tissue, may extend
below the inguinal
ligaments. Lift it to look for
inﬂammation in the skin
folds or even for a hidden
hernia.

Gas
Gaseous distention may
be localized or
generalized. It causes a
tympanitic percussion
note. Selected foods may
cause mild distention
from increased intestinal
gas production. More
serious causes are
intestinal obstruction and
adynamic (paralytic) ileus.
Note the location of the
distention. Distention is
more marked in
obstruction in the colon
than in the small bowel.

Tumor
A large solid tumor,
usually rising out of the
pelvis, is dull to
percussion. Air-ﬁlled
bowel is displaced to the
periphery. Causes include
ovarian tumors and
uterine ﬁbroids.
Occasionally, a markedly
distended bladder is
mistaken for such a tumor.

Pregnancy
Pregnancy is a common
pelvic “mass.” Listen
for the fetal heart (see
p. 945).

Tympany

Dullness

Tympany

Bulging
flank

Dullness

Tympany

Umbilicus may be
protuberant

Dullness

Ascitic Fluid
Ascitic ﬂuid seeks the lowest point in the abdomen, producing bulging ﬂanks that are dull to
percussion. The umbilicus may protrude. Turn the patient onto one side to detect the shift in
position of the ﬂuid level (shifting dullness). (See pp. 484–485 for the assessment of ascites.)

500

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 11-10 Sounds in the Abdomen

Renal artery
Aorta
Iliac artery

Bowel Sounds
Bowel sounds may be:
■ Increased, as in diarrhea or early intestinal obstruction
■ Decreased, then absent, as in adynamic ileus and peritonitis.
Before deciding that bowel sounds are absent, sit down and
listen where shown for 2 min or even longer.
High-pitched tinkling sounds suggest intestinal ﬂuid and air under
tension in a dilated bowel. Rushes of high-pitched sounds coinciding
with an abdominal cramp signal intestinal obstruction.

Bruits
A hepatic bruit suggests carcinoma of the liver or cirrhosis.
Arterial bruits with both systolic and diastolic components
suggest partial occlusion of the aorta or large arteries. Such
bruits in the epigastrium are suspicious for renal artery stenosis
or renovascular hypertension.

Hepatic
Epigastric
and
umbilical

Venous Hum
A venous hum is a rare soft humming noise with both systolic
and diastolic components. It points to increased collateral
circulation between portal and systemic venous systems, as in
hepatic cirrhosis.

Splenic

Friction Rubs
Friction rubs are rare grating sounds with respiratory
variation. They indicate inﬂammation of the peritoneal
surface of an organ, as in liver cancer, chlamydial or
gonococcal perihepatitis, recent liver biopsy, or splenic
infarct. When a systolic bruit accompanies a hepatic friction
rub, suspect carcinoma of the liver.

C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

501

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 11-11 Tender Abdomens
Abdominal Wall Tenderness

Visceral Tenderness
Superficial tender
area
Deep tender
area

Enlarged liver
Normal aorta

Normal cecum

Tenderness may originate in the abdominal wall. When the
patient raises the head and shoulders, this tenderness persists,
whereas tenderness from a deeper lesion (protected by the
tightened muscles) decreases.

Normal or spastic
sigmoid colon

The structures shown may be tender to deep palpation. Usually
the discomfort is dull with no muscular rigidity or rebound
tenderness. A reassuring explanation to the patient may prove
helpful.

Tenderness from Disease in the Chest and Pelvis

Unilateral or
bilateral, upper
or lower abdomen

Acute Pleurisy
Abdominal pain and tenderness may result from acute pleural
inﬂammation. When unilateral, it can mimic acute cholecystitis
or appendicitis. Rebound tenderness and rigidity are less
common; chest signs are usually present.

502

Acute Salpingitis
Frequently bilateral, the tenderness of acute salpingitis
(inﬂammation of the fallopian tubes) is usually maximal just
above the inguinal ligaments. Rebound tenderness and rigidity
may be present. On pelvic examination, motion of the cervix
and uterus causes pain.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Tenderness of Peritoneal Inﬂammation
Tenderness associated with peritoneal inﬂammation is more severe than visceral tenderness. Muscular rigidity and rebound
tenderness are frequently but not necessarily present. Generalized peritonitis causes exquisite tenderness throughout the
abdomen, together with board-like muscular rigidity. These signs on palpation, especially abdominal rigidity, double the
likelihood of peritonitis.73 Local causes of peritoneal inﬂammation include:

Acute Cholecystitis10
Signs are maximal in the right upper quadrant. Check for
Murphy sign (see pp. 486–487).

Acute Pancreatitis
In acute pancreatitis, epigastric tenderness and rebound tenderness
are usually present, but the abdominal wall may be soft.

Just below the
middle of a line
joining the
umbilicus and the
anterior superior
iliac spine
(McBurney point)
Right rectal
tenderness

Acute Appendicitis17,18
Right lower quadrant signs are typical of acute appendicitis
but may be absent early in the course. The typical area of
tenderness, McBurney point, is illustrated. Examine other
areas of the right lower quadrant as well as the right ﬂank.

Acute Diverticulitis
Acute diverticulitis is a conﬁned inﬂammatory process, usually
in the left lower quadrant, that involves the sigmoid colon. If
the sigmoid colon is redundant there may be suprapubic or
right-sided pain. Look for localized peritoneal signs and a
tender underlying mass. Microperforation, abscess, and
obstruction may ensue.

C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

503

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 11-12 Liver Enlargement: Apparent and Real
A palpable liver does not necessarily indicate hepatomegaly (an enlarged liver), but more often results from a change in
consistency—from the normal softness to an abnormal ﬁrmness or hardness, as in cirrhosis. Clinical estimates of liver size
should be based on both percussion and palpation, although even these techniques are imperfect compared to ultrasound.

Upper
border
low

Elongated
right lobe

Height by
percussion
normal

Downward Displacement of the Liver by a
Low Diaphragm
This ﬁnding is common when the diaphragm is ﬂattened and
low, as in COPD. The liver edge may be palpable well below
the costal margin. Percussion, however, reveals a low upper
edge, and the vertical span of the liver is normal.

Normal Variations in Liver Shape
In some individuals the right lobe of the liver may be
elongated and easily palpable as it projects downward toward
the iliac crest. Such an elongation, sometimes called Riedel
lobe, represents a variation in shape, not an increase in liver
volume or size.

Smooth Large Liver
Cirrhosis may produce an enlarged liver with a ﬁrm, nontender
edge. The cirrhotic liver may also be scarred and contracted.
Many other diseases may produce similar ﬁndings such as
hemochromatosis, amyloidosis, and lymphoma. An enlarged
liver with a smooth, tender edge suggests inﬂammation, as in
hepatitis, or venous congestion, seen in right-sided heart failure.

Irregular Large Liver
An enlarged liver that is ﬁrm or hard with an irregular edge or
surface suggests hepatocellular carcinoma. There may be one or
more nodules. The liver may or may not be tender.

504

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
REFERENCES

References
1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Center for
Health Statistics. National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Survey: 2011 Outpatient Department Summary Tables. Table 7.
Twenty leading principal reasons for outpatient department visits:
United States, 2011. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/ahcd.
htm. Accessed April 23, 2015.
2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Center for
Health Statistics. National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Survey: 2011 Emergency Department Summary Tables. Table 10. Ten
leading principal reasons for emergency department visits, by
patient age and sex: United States, 2011. Available at http://www.
cdc.gov/nchs/ahcd.htm. Accessed April 23, 2015.
3. Talley NJ, Vakil NB, Moayyedi P, et al. American Gastroenterological Association technical review on the evaluation of dyspepsia.
Gastroenterology. 2005;129:1756.
4. Drossman DA. The functional gastrointestinal disorders and the
Rome III process. Gastroenterology. 2007;130:1377.
5. Tack J, Talley NJ. Functional dyspepsia—symptoms, deﬁnitions
and validity of the Rome III criteria. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol.
2013;10:134.
6. Ranji SR, Goldman LE, Simel DL, et al. Do opiates affect the clinical evaluation of patients with acute abdominal pain? JAMA.
2006;296:1764.
7. Schneider L, Büchler MW, Werner J. Acute pancreatitis with an
emphasis on infection. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2010;24:921.
8. Fogel EL, Sherman S. ERCP for gallstone pancreatitis. N Engl J Med.
2014;370:150.
9. Guptak WB. In the clinic: acute pancreatitis. Ann Intern Med.
2010;153:ITC5–1.
10. Strasberg S. Acute calculus cholecystitis. N Engl J Med. 2008;
358:2804.
11. Wilson J. In the clinic: gastroesophageal reﬂux disease. Ann Intern
Med. 2008;149:ITC2–1.
12. DeVault KR, Castell DO. Updated guidelines for the diagnosis and
treatment of gastroesophageal reﬂux disease. Am J Gastroenterol.
2005;100:190.
13. Fletcher KC, Goutte M, Slaughter JC, et al. Signiﬁcance and degree
of reﬂux in patients with primary extraesophageal symptoms.
Laryngoscope. 2011;121:2561.
14. Shaheen NJ, Weinberg DS, Denberg TD. Upper endoscopy for gastroesophageal reﬂux disease: best practice advice from the clinical
guidelines committee of the American College of Physicians. Ann
Intern Med. 2012;157:808.
15. Spechler SJ, Souza RF. Barrett’s esophagus. N Engl J Med. 2014;
371:836.
16. Bao J, Lopez JA, Huerta S. Acute abdominal pain and abnormal CT
ﬁndings. JAMA. 2013;310:848.
17. Howell JM, Eddy OL, Lukens TW, et al. Clinical policy: critical
issues in the evaluation and management of emergency department patients with suspected appendicitis. Ann Emerg Med. 2010;
55:71.
18. Andersson RE. The natural history and traditional management of
appendicitis revisited: spontaneous resolution and predominance
of prehospital perforations imply that a correct diagnosis is more
important than an early diagnosis. World J Surg. 2007;31:86.
19. Andresson RE. Meta-analysis of the clinical and laboratory diagnosis of appendicitis. Br J Sur. 2004;91:28.

20. Camilleri M. Peripheral mechanisms in irritable bowel syndrome.
N Engl J Med. 2012;367:1626.
21. Roden DF, Altman KW. Causes of dysphagia among different age
groups: a systematic review of the literature. Otolaryngol Clin North
Am. 2013;46:965.
22. Rome III Diagnostic Criteria for Functional Gastrointestinal Disorders—Appendix A, pp. 885–898, 2006. Available at http://www.
romecriteria.org/criteria./ Accessed April 26, 2015.
23. Longstreth GF, Thompson WG, Chey WD, et al. Functional bowel
disorders. Gastroenterology. 2006;130:1480.
24. Lefﬂer DA, Lamont JT. Clostridium difﬁcile infection. N Engl J Med.
2015;372:1539.
25. Shah BJ, Rughwani N, Rose S. Constipation. In the clinic: constipation. Ann Intern Med. 2015;162:ITC-1.
26. Gallegos-Orozco JF, Foxx-Orenstein AE, Sterler SM, et al. Chronic
constipation in the elderly. Am J Gastroenterol. 2012;107:18.
27. Sarma AV, Wei JT. Benign prostatic hyperplasia and lower urinary
tract symptoms. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:248.
28. Hooton TM. Uncomplicated urinary tract infection. N Engl J Med.
2012;366:1028.
29. Gupta K, Trautner B. In the clinic: urinary tract infection. Ann
Intern Med. 2012;156:ITC3–1.
30. Bettez M, Tu le M, Carlson K, et al. 2012 update: guidelines for
adult urinary incontinence collaborative consensus document for
the Canadian Urological Association. Can Urol Assoc J. 2012;6:354.
31. Markland AD, Vaughan CP, Johnson TM 2nd, et al. Incontinence.
Med Clin North Am. 2011;95:539.
32. Holroyd-Leduc JM, Tannenbaum C, Thorpe KE, et al. What type
of urinary incontinence does this woman have? JAMA. 2008;
299:1446.
33. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. The
NSDUH Report: Substance use and mental health estimates from the
2013 National Survey on Drug Use and Health: Overview of ﬁndings.
Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration; 2014. Available at: http://store.samhsa.gov/shin/
content//NSDUH14–0904/NSDUH14–0904.pdf. Accessed March 7,
2015.
34. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Fact Sheets—Alcohol
Use and Your Health. 2014. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/alcohol/pdfs/alcoholyourhealth.pdf. Accessed March 7, 2015.
35. Wilson JF. In the clinic. Alcohol use. Ann Intern Med. 2009;
150:ITC3–1.
36. Moyer VA, U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening and
behavioral counseling interventions in primary care to reduce
alcohol misuse: U.S. preventive services task force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2013;159:210.
37. National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. Alcohol Facts
and Statistics. 2014. Available at http://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/AlcoholFacts&Stats/AlcoholFacts&Stats.pdf. Accessed
March 7, 2015.
38. National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. Helping
patients who drink too much. A Clinician’s Guide. National Institutes of Health, 2005. Available at http://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/Practitioner/CliniciansGuide2005/guide.pdf. Accessed
March 7, 2015.
39. National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. Prescribing
medications for alcohol dependence. National Institutes of Health,
2008. Available at http://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/Practitioner/CliniciansGuide2005/PrescribingMeds.pdf. Accessed
March 7, 2015.

C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

505

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
REFERENCES
40. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Hepatitis A. General
information. U.S. Department of Health & Human Services; 2012.
Available at http://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/A/PDFs/HepAGeneralFactSheet.pdf. Accessed March 7, 2015.
41. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Viral Hepatitis Statistics & Surveillance. 2014. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/hepatitis/Statistics/2012Surveillance/Table2.3.htm. Accessed March 7,
2015.
42. Fiore AE, Wasley A, Bell BP. Prevention of hepatitis A through
active or passive immunization: recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm
Rep. 2006;55:1.
43. Mast EE, Weinbaum CM, Fiore AE, et al. A comprehensive immunization strategy to eliminate transmission of hepatitis B virus
infection in the United States: recommendations of the Advisory
Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) Part II: immunization of adults. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2006;55:1.
44. LeFevre ML. Screening for hepatitis B virus infection in nonpregnant adolescents and adults: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2014;161:58.
45. Chou R, Cottrell EB, Wasson N, et al. Screening for Hepatitis C Virus
Infection in Adults. Rockville, MD: 2012. Available at http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23304739. Accessed March 7, 2015.
46. Rosen HR. Clinical practice. Chronic hepatitis C infection. N Engl
J Med. 2011;364:2429.
47. El-Serag HB. Hepatocellular carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 2011;
365:1118.
48. Moyer VA. Screening for hepatitis C virus infection in adults: U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. Ann
Intern Med. 2013;159:349.
49. Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2015. CA Cancer J
Clin. 2015;65:5.
50. Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, et al. SEER Cancer Statistics
Review, 1975–2011. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute;
2014. Available at http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2011. Accessed
March 7, 2015.
51. Edwards BK, Ward E, Kohler BA, et al. Annual report to the nation
on the status of cancer, 1975–2006, featuring colorectal cancer
trends and impact of interventions (risk factors, screening, and
treatment) to reduce future rates. Cancer. 2010;116:544.
52. American Cancer Society. Colorectal cancer facts & ﬁgures 2011–
2013, 2011. Available at http://www.cancer.org/acs/groups/content/@epidemiologysurveilance/documents/document/
acspc-028312.pdf. Accessed March 7, 2015.
53. National Cancer Institute. Genetics of colorectal cancer (PDQ®).
National Institutes of Health; 2015. Available at http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/genetics/colorectal/HealthProfessional.
Accessed March 7, 2015.
54. Holme O, Bretthauer M, Fretheim A, et al. Flexible sigmoidoscopy
versus faecal occult blood testing for colorectal cancer screening in
asymptomatic individuals. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;9:
CD009259.
55. Elmunzer BJ, Hayward RA, Schoenfeld PS, et al. Effect of ﬂexible
sigmoidoscopy-based screening on incidence and mortality of
colorectal cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. PLoS Med. 2012;9:e1001352.
56. Boyle T, Keegel T, Bull F, et al. Physical activity and risks of proximal
and distal colon cancers: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
J Natl Cancer Inst. 2012;104:1548.

506

57. Dube C, Rostom A, Lewin G, et al. The use of aspirin for primary
prevention of colorectal cancer: a systematic review prepared for
the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2007;
146:365.
58. Rostom A, Dube C, Lewin G, et al. Nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory
drugs and cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors for primary prevention of
colorectal cancer: a systematic review prepared for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2007;146:376.
59. Chlebowski RT, Wactawski-Wende J, Ritenbaugh C, et al. Estrogen
plus progestin and colorectal cancer in postmenopausal women.
N Engl J Med. 2004;350:991.
60. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Routine aspirin or nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs for the primary prevention of colorectal cancer: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation
statement. Ann Intern Med. 2007;146:361.
61. Simon MS, Chlebowski RT, Wactawski-Wende J, et al. Estrogen
plus progestin and colorectal cancer incidence and mortality.
J Clin Oncol. 2012;30:3983.
62. Chlebowski RT, Hendrix SL, Langer RD, et al. Inﬂuence of estrogen
plus progestin on breast cancer and mammography in healthy
postmenopausal women: the Women’s Health Initiative Randomized Trial. JAMA. 2003;289:3243.
63. Manson JE, Hsia J, Johnson KC, et al. Estrogen plus progestin and
the risk of coronary heart disease. N Engl J Med. 2003;349:523.
64. Cushman M, Kuller LH, Prentice R, et al. Estrogen plus progestin
and risk of venous thrombosis. JAMA. 2004;292:1573.
65. Levin TR, Zhao W, Conell C, et al. Complications of colonoscopy
in an integrated health care delivery system. Ann Intern Med. 2006;
145:880.
66. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for colorectal cancer: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2008;149:627.
67. Levin B, Lieberman DA, McFarland B, et al. Screening and surveillance for the early detection of colorectal cancer and adenomatous
polyps, 2008: a joint guideline from the American Cancer Society,
the U.S. Multi-Society Task Force on Colorectal Cancer, and the
American College of Radiology. CA Cancer J Clin. 2008;58:130.
68. MMWR Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. Vital signs:
colorectal cancer screening test use—United States, 2012. MMWR
Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2013;62:881.
69. Inadomi JM, Vijan S, Janz NK, et al. Adherence to colorectal cancer
screening: a randomized clinical trial of competing strategies. Arch
Intern Med. 2012;172:575.
70. Rex DK, Johnson DA, Anderson JC, et al. American College of
Gastroenterology guidelines for colorectal cancer screening 2009
[corrected]. Am J Gastroenterol. 2009;104:739.
71. McGee S. Ch 51, Auscultation of the Abdomen, in Evidence-based
Physical Diagnosis, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:453.
72. Cope Z. The Early Diagnosis Of The Acute Abdomen. London: Oxford
University Press; 1972.
73. McGee S. Ch 50, Abdominal pain and tenderness, in Evidence-based
Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:441–
452.
74. McGee S. Ch 49, Palpation and percussion of the abdomen, in Evidence-based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders;
2012:428–440.
75. de Bruyn G, Graviss EA. A systematic review of the diagnostic
accuracy of physical examination for the detection of cirrhosis.
BMC Med Inform Decis Mak. 2001;1:6.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
REFERENCES
76. Naylor CD. Physical examination of the liver. JAMA. 1994;271:1859.
77. Zoli M, Magalotti D, Grimaldi M, et al. Physical examination of the
liver: is it still worth it? Am J Gastroenterol. 1995;90:1428.
78. Grover SA, Barkun AN, Sackett DL. Does this patient have splenomegaly? JAMA. 1993;270:2218.
79. Kent KC. Clinical practice. Abdominal aortic aneurysms. N Engl J
Med. 2014;371:2101.
80. Lederle F. In the clinic. Abdominal aortic aneurysm. Ann Intern
Med. 2009;150:ITC5–1.
81. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Final Recommendation Statement. Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm: Screening, June 2014. Available at http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/
Document/RecommendationStatementFinal/abdominal-aorticaneurysm-screening. Accessed April 28, 2015.
82. Runyon BA, American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.
Introduction to the revised American Association for the Study of
Liver Diseases Practice Guideline management of adult patients
with ascites due to cirrhosis 2012. Hepatology. 2013:1651.

83. Williams JW, Simel DL. Does this patient have ascites? How to
divine ﬂuid in the abdomen. JAMA. 1992;267:2645.
84. American College of Physicians. Gastroenterology and Hepatology Medical Knowledge Self-Assessment Program. Philadelphia, PA:
American College of Physicians; 2013.
85. Ryan DP, Hong TS, Bardeesy N. Pancreatic adenocarcinoma. N Engl
J Med. 2014;371:1039.
86. Yadav D, Lowenfels AB. The epidemiology of pancreatitis and pancreatic cancer. Gastroenterology. 2013;144:1252.
87. Katz LH, Guy DD, Lahat A, et al. Diverticulitis in the young is not
more aggressive than in the elderly, but it tends to recur more
often: systematic review and meta-analysis. J Gastroenterol Hepatol.
2013;28:1274.
88. Acosta S. Mesenteric ischemia. Curr Opin Crit Care. 2015;21:171.
89. Sise MJ. Acute mesenteric ischemia. Surg Clin North Am. 2014;
94:165.
90. DuPont HL. Acute infectious diarrhea in immunocompetent
adults. N Engl J Med. 2014;370:1532.

C H A P T E R 11

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Abdomen

507

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

