http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

C H A P T E R

9

The Cardiovascular System
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (Vol. 10: Cardiovascular System)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com

Listening to the heart has come to epitomize the art of bedside diagnosis. Mastering the skills of cardiac examination requires patience, practice, and repetition—
a process especially vulnerable to evolving technology and the time constraints
of clinical practice.1–4 Many reports attest to the current decline in physical
examination skills, well documented for the cardiovascular system at all levels of
training.5–12 As you study this chapter, combining your knowledge of anatomy
and physiology with hands-on practice of inspection, palpation, and auscultation brings rewards of proven diagnostic value. Take advantage of the numerous
programs for learning cardiac physiology and auscultation that can reinforce
your growing clinical acumen, and pursue the emerging literature that compares
the effectiveness of different modes of learning these important skills.13–22

Anatomy and Physiology
Surface Projections of the Heart
and Great Vessels
Visualize the underlying structures of the heart as you
inspect the anterior chest. Note that the right ventricle
(RV) occupies most of the anterior cardiac surface. This
chamber and the pulmonary artery form a wedgelike
structure behind and to the left of the sternum, outlined
in black (Fig. 9-1).
Pulmonary artery

The inferior border of the RV lies below the junction of the
sternum and the xiphoid process. The RV narrows superiorly and joins the pulmonary artery at the level of the
sternal angle, or “base of the heart,” a clinical term that
refers to the superior aspect of the heart at the right and
left 2nd interspaces adjacent to the sternum.

Right ventricle

FIGURE 9-1.

CHAPTER 9

Chest wall and cardiac anatomy.

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

343

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

Aorta
Pulmonary
artery

Left ventricle
Superior
vena cava

Apical impulse

Right atrium
Right ventricle

FIGURE 9-2.

Cardiac anatomy—major structures.

The left ventricle, behind the RV and to the left, forms the left lateral margin of
the heart (Fig. 9-2). Its tapered inferior tip is often termed the cardiac apex. It is
clinically important because it produces the apical impulse, identiﬁed during
palpation of the precordium as the point of maximal impulse (PMI). This impulse
locates the left border of the heart and is normally found in the 5th intercostal
space at or just medial to the left midclavicular line (or 7 to 9 cm lateral to the
midsternal line). The PMI is not always palpable, even in a healthy patient with
a normal heart. Detection is affected by both the patient’s body habitus and position during the examination.
■ In supine patients the diameter of the PMI may be as large as a quarter,

approximately 1 to 2.5 cm.

■ Note that, in some patients, the most prominent precordial impulse may not

be at the apex of the left ventricle. For example, in patients with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), the most prominent palpable impulse or PMI may be in the xiphoid or epigastric area due to right ventricular
hypertrophy.

Rarely, in situs inversus and dextrocardia, the PMI is located on the right
side of the chest.

A PMI >2.5 cm is evidence of left
ventricular hypertrophy (LVH) from
hypertension or aortic stenosis.
Displacement of the PMI lateral to the
midclavicular line or >10 cm lateral to
the midsternal line occurs in LVH and
also in ventricular dilatation from myocardial infarction (MI) or heart failure.

Above the heart lie the great vessels. The pulmonary artery bifurcates quickly into
its left and right branches. The aorta curves upward from the left ventricle to the
level of the sternal angle, where it arches posteriorly to the left and then downward. On the medial border, the superior and inferior venae cavae channel venous
blood from the upper and lower portions of the body into the right atrium.
344

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

Cardiac Chambers, Valves, and Circulation
Circulation through the heart is diagrammed below. Identify the cardiac chambers, valves, and direction of blood ﬂow. Because of their location, the mitral and
tricuspid valves are often called atrioventricular (AV) valves. The aortic and pulmonic valves are called semilunar valves because the valve leaﬂets are shaped like
half moons.
As the heart valves close, the heart sounds of S1 and S2 arise from vibrations
emanating from the leaﬂets, the adjacent cardiac structures, and the ﬂow of
blood. Study carefully the opening and closing of the AV and semilunar valves
in relation to events in the cardiac cycle to improve your diagnostic accuracy as
you auscultate the heart. In Figure 9-3, note that the aortic and pulmonic valves
are closed, and the mitral and tricuspid valves are open, as seen in diastole.

Aorta

In most adults over age 40 years, the
diastolic sounds of S3 and S4 are
pathologic, and are correlated with
heart failure and acute myocardial
ischemia.19,23,24 In recent studies, an S3
corresponds to an abrupt deceleration
of inflow across the mitral valve, and
an S4 to increased left ventricular end
diastolic stiffness which decreases
compliance.25–27

Pulmonary artery
(to lungs)
Pulmonary veins
(from lungs)
Superior
vena cava
Pulmonic
valve

LA
Aortic valve
RA

Mitral valve

Tricuspid valve
LV
RV

Inferior vena cava

Course of oxygenated blood

Course of deoxygenated blood

RA = Right atrium; LA = Left atrium; RV = Right ventricle; LV = Left ventricle

FIGURE 9-3.

Cardiac chambers, valves, and circulation.

Events in the Cardiac Cycle
The heart serves as a pump that generates varying pressures as its chambers
contract and relax. Systole is the period of ventricular contraction. As shown in
Figure 9-4, pressure in the left ventricle rises, from less than 5 mm Hg in its
resting state, to a normal peak of 120 mm Hg. After the ventricle ejects much of
its blood into the aorta, the pressure levels off and starts to fall. Diastole is the
CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

345

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Left ventricular pressure curve

120

mm Hg

0
Systole

FIGURE 9-4.

Diastole

Cardiac cycle—left ventricle.

period of ventricular relaxation. Ventricular pressure falls further to below
5 mm Hg, and blood ﬂows from atrium to ventricle. Late in diastole, ventricular
pressure rises slightly during inﬂow of blood from atrial contraction.

Note that during systole the aortic valve is open, allowing ejection of blood from
the left ventricle into the aorta. The mitral valve is closed, preventing blood from
regurgitating back into the left atrium. In contrast, during diastole the aortic valve
is closed, preventing regurgitation of blood from the aorta back into the left ventricle. The mitral valve is open, allowing blood to ﬂow from the left atrium into
the relaxed left ventricle. At the same time, during systole the pulmonic valve
opens and the tricuspid valve closes as blood is ejected from the RV into the
pulmonary artery. During diastole, the pulmonic valve closes and the tricuspid
valve opens as blood ﬂows into the right atrium.
Understanding the interrelationships of the pressure gradients in the left heart
(the left atrium, left ventricle, and aorta), together with the position and movement of the four heart valves, is fundamental to understanding heart sounds. An
extensive literature explores how heart sounds are generated. Possible explanations include closure of the valve leaﬂets; tensing of related structures, leaﬂet
positions, and pressure gradients at the time of atrial and ventricular systole; and
the acoustic effects of moving columns of blood.
Trace the changing left ventricular pressures and sounds through one cardiac
cycle. Note that S1 and S2 deﬁne the duration of systole and diastole. Right heart
346

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
sounds occur at pressures that are usually lower than those on the left, and are
usually less audible. The explanations given here are oversimpliﬁed, but retain
clinical usefulness.
During diastole, pressure in the bloodﬁlled left atrium slightly exceeds that in
the relaxed left ventricle, and blood ﬂows
from left atrium to left ventricle across the
open mitral valve (Fig. 9-5). Just before
the onset of ventricular systole, atrial contraction produces a slight pressure rise in
both chambers.
During systole, the left ventricle starts to
contract and ventricular pressure rapidly
exceeds left atrial pressure, closing the
mitral valve (Fig. 9-6). Closure of the mitral
valve produces the ﬁrst heart sound, S1.

Atrial contraction

Left atrial pressure
Left ventricular pressure

FIGURE 9-5.

Cardiac cycle—diastole.

Left ventricular pressure

Mitral
valve
closes

Left atrial pressure

S1

F I G U R E 9 - 6 . Diastole—mitral valve closes.

As left ventricular pressure continues to
rise, it quickly exceeds the pressure in the
aorta and forces the aortic valve open
(Fig. 9-7). In some pathologic conditions,
an early systolic ejection sound (Ej)
accompanies the opening of the aortic
valve. Normally, maximal left ventricular
pressure corresponds to systolic blood
pressure.

Aortic
valve
opens

Left ventricular pressure
Aortic pressure

S1 Ej

FIGURE 9-7.

Systole—aortic valve opens.

As the left ventricle ejects most of its
blood, ventricular pressure begins to fall.
When left ventricular pressure drops
below aortic pressure, the aortic valve
closes (Fig. 9-8). Aortic valve closure
produces the second heart sound, S2,
and another diastole begins.

Aortic valve closes
Aortic pressure
Left ventricular pressure

Left atrial pressure

S1 Ej

FIGURE 9-8.

S2

Systole—aortic valve closes.

CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

347

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
In diastole, left ventricular pressure continues to drop and falls below left atrial
pressure. The mitral valve opens
(Fig. 9-9). This event is usually silent, but
may be audible as a pathologic opening
snap (OS) if valve leaﬂet motion is
restricted, as in mitral stenosis.

Aortic pressure

Mitral valve opens
Left atrial pressure
Left ventricular pressure

S1 E j

S2 OS

FIGURE 9-9.

Diastole—mitral valve opens.

After the mitral valve opens, there is a
period of rapid ventricular ﬁlling as blood
ﬂows early in diastole from left atrium to
left ventricle (Fig. 9-10). In children and
young adults, a third heart sound, S3, may
arise from rapid deceleration of the column of blood against the ventricular wall.
In older adults, an S3, sometimes termed
“an S3 gallop,” usually indicates a pathologic change in ventricular compliance.

Period of rapid
ventricular filling

S1 Ej

S2 OS S3

F I G U R E 9 - 1 0 . Diastole—rapid ventricular ﬁlling; S3.

Finally, although not often heard in normal adults, a fourth heart sound, S4,
marks atrial contraction (Fig. 9-11). It
immediately precedes S1 of the next beat
and can also reﬂect a pathologic change in
ventricular compliance.

Augmented ventricular
filling as a result of
atrial contraction

S1 Ej

S2 OS S3
Systole

FIGURE 9-11.

S4

Diastole

Diastole—atrial contraction; S4.

The Splitting of Heart Sounds
While these events are occurring on the left side of the heart, similar changes are
occurring on the right side, which involves the right atrium, tricuspid valve, RV,
pulmonic valve, and pulmonary arteries. Right ventricular and pulmonary arterial pressures are signiﬁcantly lower than corresponding pressures on the left
side. Note that right-sided cardiac events usually occur slightly later than those
on the left. Instead of a hearing a single heart sound for S2, you may hear two
discernible components, the ﬁrst from left-sided aortic valve closure, or A2, and
the second from right-sided closure of the pulmonic valve, or P2.
348

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The second heart sound, S2, and its two components, A2 and P2, are caused primarily by closure of the aortic and pulmonic valves, respectively. During inspiration, the right heart ﬁlling time is increased, which increases right ventricular
stroke volume and the duration of right ventricular ejection compared with the
neighboring left ventricle. This delays the closure of the pulmonic valve, P2,
splitting S2 into its two audible components. During expiration, these two components fuse into a single sound, S2 (Fig. 9-12). Note that because walls of veins
contain less smooth muscle, the venous system has more capacitance than the
arterial system and lower systemic pressure. Distensibility and impedance in the
pulmonary vascular bed contribute to the “hangout time” that delays P2.28
A2

S1

P2

S2
INSPIRATION

FIGURE 9-12.
inspiration.

S1

S2
EXPIRATION

Spitting of S2 during

Of the two components of the S2, A2 is normally louder, reﬂecting the high
pressure in the aorta. It is heard throughout the precordium. In contrast, P2 is
relatively soft, reﬂecting the lower pressure in the pulmonary artery. It is heard
best in its own area, the 2nd and 3rd left interspaces close to the sternum. It is
here that you should search for the splitting of S2.

S1 also has two components, an earlier mitral and a later tricuspid sound. The
mitral sound—the principal component of S1—is much louder, again reﬂecting
the higher pressures on the left side of the heart. It can be heard throughout the
precordium and is loudest at the cardiac apex. The softer tricuspid component
is heard best at the lower left sternal border; it is here that you may hear a split
S1. The earlier louder mitral component may mask the tricuspid sound, however, and splitting is not always detectable. Splitting of S1 does not vary with
respiration.

Heart Murmurs
Heart murmurs are distinct heart sounds distinguished by their pitch and their
longer duration. They are attributed to turbulent blood ﬂow and are usually
diagnostic of valvular heart disease. At times, they may also represent “innocent”
ﬂow murmurs, especially in young adults. A stenotic valve has an abnormally
narrowed valvular oriﬁce that obstructs blood ﬂow, as in aortic stenosis, and
causes a characteristic murmur. So does a valve that fails to fully close, as in
aortic regurgitation. Such a valve allows blood to leak backward in a retrograde
direction and produces a regurgitant murmur.
To identify murmurs accurately, you must learn where they are best heard on the
chest wall, their timing in systole or diastole, and their descriptive qualities. In
the Techniques of Examination section, you will learn to integrate location and
CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

349

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
timing with the murmur’s shape, maximal intensity, direction of radiation, grade
of intensity, pitch, and quality (see pp. 373–399).

Relation of Auscultatory Findings
to the Chest Wall
The locations on the chest wall where you auscultate heart sounds and murmurs
help identify the valve or chamber where they originate.
Chest Wall Location and Origin of
Valve Sounds and Murmurs
Typical Origin of
Sounds and Murmurs

Chest Wall Location
Right 2nd interspace to the apex
Left 2nd and 3rd interspaces close to the
sternum, but also at higher or lower levels
At or near the lower left sternal border
At and around the cardiac apex

Aortic valve
Pulmonic valve
Tricuspid valve
Mitral valve

These areas overlap, as illustrated in Figure 9-13. Integrating the auscultatory
location with the timing of the sound or murmur, either systole or diastole, is an
important ﬁrst step in identifying sounds and murmurs correctly, and often leads
to accurate bedside diagnosis when integrated with other cardiac ﬁndings.

Aortic

Pulmonic

Tricuspid

Mitral

FIGURE 9-13.

350

Listening areas on the chest wall.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

The Conduction System
An electrical conduction system stimulates and coordinates the contraction of
cardiac muscle.
Normally, each electrical impulse originates in the sinus node, a group of specialized cardiac cells located in the right atrium near the junction of the vena cava.
The sinus node acts as the cardiac pacemaker and
Sinoatrial
(SA) node
automatically discharges an impulse about 60 to 90
times a minute. This impulse travels through both
atria to the AV node, a specialized group of cells Atrioventricular
(AV) node
located low in the atrial septum. Here, the impulse is
delayed before passing down the bundle of His and
its branches to the ventricular myocardium. Muscu- Bundle of His
lar contraction follows: ﬁrst the atria, then the ventricles. The normal conduction system is diagrammed
Right bundle branch
in Figure 9-14 in simpliﬁed form.

FIGURE 9-14.

Interatrial
bundle
Left bundle
branch

Cardiac conduction system.

The Electrocardiogram. The electrocardiogram, or ECG, records these
events. Contraction of cardiac smooth muscle produces electrical activity,
resulting in a series of waves on the ECG. The ECG consists of six limb leads in
the frontal plane (Fig. 9-15) and six chest or precordial leads in the transverse plane
(Fig. 9-16).
Superior

Posterior

aVR

aVL

I
Right

Left
V6

Right

Left
V5

III

II
aVF

V1

F I G U R E 9 - 1 5 . Limb leads: frontal
plane.

V2

V3

V4

F I G U R E 9 - 1 6 . Chest leads:
transverse plane.

■ Electrical vectors approaching a lead cause a positive, or upward, deﬂection.
■ Electrical vectors moving away from the lead cause a negative, or downward,

deﬂection.
■ When positive and negative vectors balance, they are isoelectric and appear

as a straight line.
CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

351

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
P, Q, R, S, and T Waves. The deﬂections of the normal ECG and their
duration are brieﬂy summarized here and shown in Figure 9-17. You will need
further instruction and considerable practice to interpret recordings from
patients.
R

The small P wave of atrial depolarization (duration up to 80 milliseconds; PR
interval 120 to 200 milliseconds)
● The larger QRS complex of ventricular depolarization (up to 100 milliseconds),
consisting of one or more of the following:
● the Q wave, a downward deﬂection from septal depolarization
● the R wave, an upward deﬂection from ventricular depolarization
● the S wave, a downward deﬂection following an R wave
● A T wave of ventricular repolarization, or recovery (duration relates to QRS)
●

P

Q S

T

F I G U R E 9 - 1 7 . ECG deﬂections.

ECG Waves and the Cardiac Cycle. The electrical impulse slightly
precedes the myocardial contraction that it stimulates. The relation of
electrocardiographic waves to the cardiac cycle is shown in Figure 9-18.
Q RS

Q RS

T

P

T

P

Electrocardiogram

S4 S1

S2

S3

Systole

FIGURE 9-18.

S4 S1

S2

Diastole

ECG waves and the cardiac cycle.

The Heart as a Pump
The left and right ventricles pump blood into the systemic and pulmonary arterial trees, respectively. Cardiac output, the volume of blood ejected from each
ventricle during 1 minute, is the product of heart rate and stroke volume. Stroke
volume (the volume of blood ejected with each heartbeat) depends in turn on
preload, myocardial contractility, and afterload.
■ Preload refers to the load that stretches the cardiac muscle before contraction.

The volume of blood in the RV at the end of diastole constitutes its preload

352

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Heart sounds

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
for the next beat. Right ventricular preload is increased by increasing venous
return to the right heart. Physiologic causes include inspiration and the
increased volume of blood ﬂow from exercising muscles. The increased
blood volume of a dilated RV in heart failure also increases preload. Causes
of decreased right ventricular preload include exhalation, decreased left ventricular output, and pooling of blood in the capillary bed or the venous
system.
■ Myocardial contractility refers to the ability of the cardiac muscle, when given

a load, to shorten. Contractility increases when stimulated by action of the
sympathetic nervous system and decreases when blood ﬂow or oxygen delivery to the myocardium is impaired.
■ Afterload refers to the degree of vascular resistance to ventricular contrac-

tion. Sources of resistance to contraction include the tone in the walls of
the aorta, the large arteries, and the peripheral vascular tree (primarily the
small arteries and arterioles), as well as the volume of blood already in the
aorta.
Pathologic increases in preload and afterload, called volume overload and pressure
overload, respectively, produce changes in ventricular function that may be clinically detectable. These changes include alterations in ventricular impulses,
detectable by palpation, and in normal heart sounds. Pathologic heart sounds
and murmurs may also develop.

The terms heart failure with preserved
ejection fraction (EF) and heart failure
with reduced EF are now preferred to
“congestive heart failure” because of
differences in treatment.29

Arterial Pulses and Blood Pressure
With each contraction, the left ventricle ejects a volume of blood into the
aorta that then perfuses the arterial tree. As the ensuing pressure wave moves
rapidly through the arterial system it generates the arterial pulse. Although
the pressure wave travels quickly, many times faster than the blood itself,
a palpable delay between ventricular contraction and peripheral pulses
makes the pulses in the arms and legs unsuitable for timing events in the
cardiac cycle.
Blood pressure in the arterial system varies during the cardiac cycle, peaking in
systole and falling to its lowest trough in diastole (Fig. 9-19). These are the
levels that are measured with the blood pressure cuff, or sphygmomanometer.
The difference between systolic and diastolic pressures is known as the pulse
pressure.

Factors Affecting Blood Pressure
Left ventricular stroke volume
Distensibility of the aorta and the large arteries
● Peripheral vascular resistance, particularly at the arteriolar level
● Volume of blood in the arterial system
●
●

CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

353

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
120

Systolic pressure

mm Hg

Pulse pressure

Diastolic pressure

80

40
Systole

Diastole

0

FIGURE 9-19.

Blood pressure and pulse pressure in the cardiac cycle.

Changes in any of these four factors alter systolic pressure, diastolic pressure,
or both. Blood pressure levels ﬂuctuate strikingly throughout any 24-hour
period, varying with physical activity, emotional state, pain, noise, environmental temperature, use of coffee, tobacco, and other drugs, and even time
of day.

Jugular Venous Pressure and Pulsations
The jugular veins provide an important index of right heart pressures and cardiac
function. Jugular venous pressure ( JVP) reﬂects right atrial pressure, which in
turn equals central venous pressure and right ventricular end-diastolic pressure. The JVP is best estimated from the right internal jugular vein, which has
the most direct channel into the right atrium. Some afﬁrm that the right external jugular vein can also be used.30 Because the jugular veins lie deep to the
sternocleidomastoid (SCM) muscles, learn to identify the pulsations they transmit to the surface of the neck, brieﬂy described below, and measure their highest
point of oscillation.
Changing pressures in the right atrium during
diastole and systole produce oscillations of ﬁlling and emptying in the jugular veins, or jugular
venous pulsations (Fig. 9-20). Atrial contraction
produces an a wave in the jugular veins just
before S1 and systole, followed by the x descent
of atrial relaxation. As right atrial pressure begins
to rise with inﬂow from the vena cava during
right ventricular systole, there is a second elevation, the v wave, followed by the y descent as
blood passively empties into the RV during early
and middiastole.

354

See pp. 374–379 for more detailed
discussion of the JVP and techniques
for its examination.

a
v

y
x

S1

S2

Systole

FIGURE 9-20.
pulsations.

S1

S2

Diastole

Jugular venous

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY

Changes Over the Life Span
Aging may affect the location of the apical impulse, the pitch of heart sounds and
murmurs, the stiffness of the arteries, and blood pressure. For example, the PMI
is usually easily palpated in children and young adults; as the chest deepens in
its anteroposterior (AP) diameter, the impulse gets harder to ﬁnd. For the same
reason, splitting of S2 may be harder to hear in older people as its pulmonic component becomes less audible. Furthermore, at some time during the life span,
almost everyone has a heart murmur. Most murmurs occur without other evidence of cardiovascular abnormality and are considered normal variants. These
common murmurs vary with age, and knowing their patterns helps you to distinguish normal from abnormal.

Turn to Chapter 18, Assessing Children: Infancy Through Adolescence,
pp. 799–925, and to Chapter 19, The
Pregnant Woman, p. 943, for discussion of these innocent murmurs.

Murmurs may originate in large blood vessels as well as in the heart. The jugular
venous hum, which is common in children, may still be heard through young
adulthood (see pp. 878–879). A second more important example is the cervical
systolic murmur or bruit, which may be innocent in children but suspicious for
atherosclerotic disease in adults.

The Health History
Common or Concerning Symptoms
Chest pain
Palpitations
● Shortness of breath: dyspnea, orthopnea, or paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea
● Swelling (edema)
● Fainting (syncope)
●
●

Assessing Cardiac Symptoms—Overview and Comparison
with Baseline Activity Levels. This section approaches chest
symptoms from a cardiac standpoint, and includes the important symptoms of
chest pain, palpitations, shortness of breath from orthopnea or paroxysmal
nocturnal dyspnea (PND), swelling from edema, and fainting. For chest
symptoms, be systematic as you think through the range of possible cardiac,
pulmonary, and extrathoracic etiologies. Study the various causes of chest
pain, dyspnea, wheezing, cough, and even hemoptysis, because these symptoms
can be cardiac as well as pulmonary in origin.

Review the Health History section of
Chapter 8, The Thorax and Lungs,
pp. 303–342; Table 8-1, Chest Pain,
pp. 330–331; and Table 8-2, Dyspnea,
pp. 332–333.

When assessing cardiac symptoms, it is important to quantify the patient’s
baseline level of activity. For example, in patients with chest pain, does the pain
occur with climbing stairs? How many ﬂights? How many steps? How about with
walking—50 feet, one block, more? What about carrying groceries, making
beds, or vacuuming? How does this compare with these activities in the past?

CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

355

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY
When did the symptoms appear or change? If the patient is short of breath, does
this occur at rest, during exercise, or after climbing stairs? Sudden shortness of
breath has different implications in an athlete compared to a person who only
walks from one room to another. Quantifying the baseline level of activity helps
establish both the severity of the patient’s symptoms and their signiﬁcance as you
consider the next steps for management.
Chest Pain. Chest pain is one of the most serious of all patient complaints,
and accounts for 1% of primary care outpatient visits.31 It is the most common
symptom of coronary heart disease (CHD), which affects over 15 million
Americans age ≥20 years.32 In 2012, the prevalence of MI was 7.6 million
people and of angina pectoris, 8.2 million. CHD is the leading killer of both
men and women. In 2011, CHD accounted for one in seven U.S. deaths. Death
rates remain highest for black men and black women compared to other ethnic
groups.

Classic exertional pain, pressure, or
discomfort in the chest, shoulder,
back, neck, or arm in angina pectoris, is seen in 18% of patients with
acute MI32; atypical descriptors also
are common, such as cramping,
grinding, pricking or, rarely, tooth
or jaw pain.33

As you evaluate your patient’s history of chest pain, always consider lifethreatening diagnoses such as angina pectoris, MI, dissecting aortic aneurysm, and pulmonary embolus.31,34–36 Learn to distinguish cardiovascular
causes from disorders of the pericardium, trachea and bronchi, parietal pleura,
esophagus, and chest wall, and from extrathoracic causes in the neck, shoulder, gallbladder, and stomach.

Acute coronary syndrome is increasingly used to describe the clinical syndromes caused by acute myocardial
ischemia, which include unstable
angina, non–ST elevation MI, and ST
elevation infarction.32

Both men and women with acute coronary syndrome usually present with the
classic symptoms of exertional angina; however, women, particularly those
over age 65, are more likely to report atypical symptoms that may go unrecognized, such as upper back, neck, or jaw pain, shortness of breath, paroxysmal
nocturnal dyspnea, nausea or vomiting, and fatigue, making careful history
taking especially important.37–39 Failure to identify cardiac causes of chest pain
can have dire consequences. Inappropriate discharge from the emergency room
results in a 25% mortality rate.40

Causes of chest pain in the absence of
coronary artery disease on angiogram
include microvascular coronary dysfunction and abnormal cardiac nocioception,
which require specialized testing.37
Roughly half of women with chest pain
and normal angiograms have microvascular coronary dysfunction.

Begin with open-ended questions… “Please tell me about any symptoms you
might be having in your chest.” Then elicit more speciﬁc details. Ask the patient
to point to the pain and describe all seven features of the symptom. Clarify “Is the
pain related to exertion?” and “What kinds of activities bring on the pain?” Also,
“How intense is the pain, on a scale of 1 to 10?”… “Does it radiate into the neck,
shoulder, back, or down your arm?”… “Are there any associated symptoms like
shortness of breath, sweating, palpitations, or nausea?”… “Does it ever wake you
up at night?”… “What do you do to make it better?”

Anterior chest pain, often tearing or ripping and radiating into the back or neck,
occurs in acute aortic dissection.36,41

Palpitations. Palpitations involve an unpleasant awareness of the
heartbeat. Patients use various terms to describe palpitations such as skipping,
racing, ﬂuttering, pounding, or stopping of the heart. Palpitations may be
irregular, rapidly slow down or accelerate, or arise from the increased
forcefulness of cardiac contraction. Anxious and hyperthyroid patients may
report palpitations. Palpitations do not necessarily mean heart disease. In
contrast, the most serious dysrhythmias, such as ventricular tachycardia, often
do not produce palpitations.

See Table 9-1, Selected Heart Rates
and Rhythms, and Table 9-2, Selected
Irregular Rhythms, for selected heart
rates and rhythms (pp. 400–401).

356

If there are symptoms or signs of
irregular heart action, obtain an ECG.
This includes atrial fibrillation, which
causes an “irregularly irregular” pulse
often identified at the bedside.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
THE HEALTH HISTORY

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Reword your questions if needed—“Are you ever aware of your heartbeat? What
is it like?” Ask the patient to tap out the rhythm with a hand or ﬁnger. Was it fast
or slow? Regular or irregular? How long did it last? If there was an episode of
rapid heartbeats, did they start and stop suddenly or gradually? For this group
of symptoms, an ECG is indicated.

Clues in the history include: transient skips and flip-flops (possible
premature contractions); rapid
regular beating of sudden onset
and offset (possible paroxysmal
supraventricular tachycardia); and a
rapid regular rate of <120 beats per
minute, especially if gradually starting and stopping (possible sinus
tachycardia).

Teach selected patients how to take serial measurements of their pulse rates in
case they have further episodes.

Shortness of Breath. Shortness of breath is a common patient concern that
can represent dyspnea, orthopnea, or PND. Dyspnea is an uncomfortable awareness
of breathing that is inappropriate to a given level of exertion. This complaint is
common in patients with cardiac or pulmonary problems.

Sudden dyspnea occurs in pulmonary
embolus, spontaneous pneumothorax,
and anxiety.

Orthopnea is dyspnea that occurs when the patient is supine and improves when
the patient sits up. Classically, it is quantiﬁed by the number of pillows the
patient uses for sleeping, or by the fact that the patient needs to sleep sitting up.
Make sure that the patient is using extra pillows or sleeping upright due to shortness of breath and not other causes.

Orthopnea and PND occur in left ventricular heart failure and mitral stenosis and also in obstructive lung disease.

PND describes episodes of sudden dyspnea and orthopnea that awaken the
patient from sleep, usually 1 or 2 hours after going to bed, prompting the patient
to sit up, stand up, or go to a window for air. There may be associated wheezing
and coughing. The episode usually subsides but may recur at about the same
time on subsequent nights.

PND may be mimicked by nocturnal
asthma attacks.

Swelling (Edema). Swelling, or edema, refers to the accumulation of
excessive ﬂuid in the extravascular interstitial space. Interstitial tissue can absorb
up to 5 L of ﬂuid, accommodating up to a 10% weight gain, before pitting edema
appears.43,44 Causes vary from systemic to local. Focus on the location, timing,
and setting of the swelling, and on associated symptoms. “Have you had any
swelling anywhere? Where? … Anywhere else? When does it occur? Is it worse
in the morning or at night? Do your shoes get tight?”

Causes are frequently cardiac (right or
left ventricular dysfunction; pulmonary hypertension) or pulmonary
(obstructive lung disease),45 but can
also be nutritional (hypoalbuminemia), and/or positional. Dependent
edema appears in the lowest body
parts: the feet and lower legs when
sitting, or the sacrum when bedridden. Anasarca is severe generalized
edema extending to the sacrum and
abdomen.

Continue with “Are the rings tight on your ﬁngers? Are your eyelids puffy or
swollen in the morning? Have you had to let out your belt?” Also, “Have your
clothes gotten tight around the middle?” Consider asking patients who retain
ﬂuid to record daily morning weights because edema may not be obvious until
several liters of extra ﬂuid have accumulated.

Look for the periorbital puffiness and
tight rings of nephrotic syndrome
and an enlarged waistline from ascites
and liver failure.

CHAPTER 9

See Chapter 8, The Thorax and Lungs,
pp. 303–342.

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

357

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Fainting (Syncope). Fainting, blacking out, or syncope, is a transient loss
of consciousness followed by recovery. Since the most common cause is
neurocardiogenic (also called neutrally mediated vasodepressor syncope or
vasovagal syncope) and of cardiac origin from arrhythmias in only ∼20% of
cases, please turn to Chapter 17, The Nervous System, p. 724 and Table 17-3,
pp. 778–779 for discussion of the symptoms and causes of syncope.

Health Promotion and
Counseling: Evidence and
Recommendations
Important Topics for Health Promotion
and Counseling
The challenges of cardiovascular disease screening
Special populations at risk
● Screening for cardiovascular risk factors
● Step 1: Screen for global risk factors
● Step 2: Calculate 10-year and lifetime CVD risk using an online calculator
● Step 3: Track individual risk factors—hypertension, diabetes, dyslipidemias,
metabolic syndrome, smoking, family history, and obesity
● Promoting lifestyle changes and risk factor modiﬁcation
●
●

CVD, which consists primarily of hypertension (which accounts for the vast
majority of diagnoses), CHD, heart failure, and stroke, affects nearly 84 million
U.S. adults.46 CVD is the leading cause of death in the United States, accounting
for almost 800,000 deaths in 2011. CVD death rates have been declining due
to both reduction in cardiovascular risk factors, or primary prevention, and
improvements in secondary prevention—treatments following clinical CVD
events, such as heart attack and stroke. However, CVD still accounts for about
one of every three deaths in the United States, and obesity, diabetes, hypertension, physical inactivity, and tobacco abuse present important challenges to
achieving greater reductions in the burden of CVD.47
Health promotion to prevent CVD includes screening for and addressing important risk factors, knowledge of evidence-based guidelines and interventions, and
acquisition of interviewing and counseling skills that nurture healthier lifestyles
and behaviors. As emerging clinicians, your task is threefold:

See discussion of Promoting Lifestyle
and Risk Factor Modification, p. 358,
and Chapter 3, Interviewing and the
Health History, p. 81, for discussion of
motivational interviewing.48

1. To understand important epidemiologic data about CVD and prevention
2. To identify modiﬁable cardiovascular risk factors
3. To help patients reduce cardiovascular risk by adopting lifestyle changes and
appropriate pharmacologic treatments
358

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
The Challenges of Cardiovascular Disease Screening. New
studies continually reﬁne our understanding of the epidemiology of CVD and
provide evidence-based guidance for preventive interventions. Many
cardiovascular diseases share common risk factors, and major professional
societies of related disciplines are now issuing joint guidelines. As a result,
screening guidelines are becoming more complex as approaches to speciﬁc risk
groups become more customized. For example, guidelines for prescribing
aspirin for primary prevention now differ by gender, age, and risk of CHD
versus stroke.49,50 Increasingly, clinicians are urged to engage patients in shared
decision making, helping them make informed personalized decisions about
preventive interventions which can have both beneﬁts and harms. As an aid,
online calculators are available for rapidly assessing risk for coronary artery
disease and stroke.

This section on Health Promotion and Counseling section provides an
approach to screening and prevention, but you should review the excellent
reports listed below for a deeper understanding of the evidence base of recent
recommendations.
Key Reports on Cardiovascular Health and
Risk Assessment
Heart disease and stroke statistics—2016 update: a report from the American
Heart Association (AHA).32 Updated annually.
● 2013 American College of Cardiology (ACC)/AHA guideline on the assessment
of cardiovascular risk: a report of the ACC/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines.51
● Eﬀectiveness-based guidelines for the prevention of CVD in women—2011
update: a guideline from the AHA.52
● Management of high blood pressure in blacks. An update of the International
Society on Hypertension in Blacks consensus statement 2010.53
● Guidelines for the primary prevention of stroke. A guideline for healthcare
professionals from the AHA/American Stroke Association 2014.54
● American Diabetes Association. Executive summary: Standards of medical
care in diabetes—2015.55 Updated annually.
●

Screening Early. Heart disease has “a long asymptomatic latent period,”
and about half of all coronary deaths lack prior warning signs or cardiac diagnoses.56 Consequently, clinicians are encouraged to assess lifetime risk in
asymptomatic patients, possibly beginning as early as age 20 years. Earlier
risk assessment can lead to more timely interventions to lower the burden of
CVD.

CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

359

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
The Challenge of Risk Factor Reduction. The 2020 AHA goals promote
the concept of “ideal cardiovascular health,” deﬁned as:

The absence of clinically manifest CVD and the simultaneous presence of
optimal levels of seven health metrics, including four health behaviors (lean
body mass index <25 kg/m2, not smoking, being physically active, and following a healthy diet), and three health factors (untreated total cholesterol
<200 mg/dL, untreated blood pressure <120/<80 mm Hg, and fasting blood
glucose <100 mg/dL).46
Figure 9-21, based on data available in 2014, shows that substantial portions of
the United States population fail to reach ideal cardiovascular health. Among U.S.
adults age ≥20 years, the age-standardized prevalence of ideal levels of cardiovascular health behaviors and factors ranges widely: for the healthy diet score—0.5%;
weight—31%; blood pressure—45%; physical activity—41%; cholesterol—47%;
fasting glucose—58%; and never smoked or stopped smoking for more than 12
month—76%. Most U.S. adults, ∼68%, have two, three, or four criteria at ideal
levels of cardiovascular health. Approximately 13% of U.S. adults meet ﬁve or
more criteria, 5% meet six or more criteria, and virtually none meet seven
criteria at ideal levels.32

F I G U R E 9 - 2 1 . American Heart Association Prevalence Estimates for poor,
intermediate, and ideal cardiovascular health (U.S. adults, 2014). Source: Go AS, Mozaffarian D, Roger
VL, et al. Heart disease and stroke statistics—2014 update: a report from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2014;129:e28.

The AHA has set the ambitious goals of improving cardiovascular health for all
Americans between 2010 and 2020 by 20% and of reducing deaths from CVD
and stroke by 20%.32

360

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Special Populations at Risk
Women. Women have become increasingly aware that CVD is their leading cause of death.57 Improved CVD prevention and treatment efforts for
women have led to dramatic decreases in the age-adjusted mortality rates for
CHD—a decrease of nearly two thirds between 1980 and 2007.57,58 Nonetheless, in the 2011 Guideline for the Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease in
Women, the AHA cautioned that “reversing a trend of the past 4 decades, CHD
death rates in U.S. women 35 to 54 years of age now actually appear to be
increasing,” which the AHA attributed to the effects of obesity.52 Men’s cardiovascular risk scores have improved more than women’s in recent years, though
the prevalence of diabetes has increased in both sexes.59 The statistics below
illuminate concerning issues for cardiovascular health in women.

Cardiovascular Disease in U.S. Women
2013 data indicate that CVD death rates remain signiﬁcantly higher for
black women than white women, 247 versus 184 per 100,000, largely
due to disparities in risk factors such as hypertension, diabetes, and
obesity.32 CHD death rates are also higher for black women than white
women, 94.7 versus 75.0 per 100,000.
● Women age >65 years have a slightly higher prevalence of hypertension
than men, but a much higher prevalence of uncontrolled hypertension.
Black women have the highest prevalence of hypertension (46%) and
uncontrolled hypertension. About two thirds of all U.S. women are now
overweight or obese, contributing to the epidemic of type 2 diabetes and
increasing risks for MI and stroke.
● Women account for nearly 60% of stroke deaths in the United States and
have a higher lifetime risk of stroke than men. Stroke risk increases with age,
and women have a greater life expectancy than men. Women also have a
lower awareness of heart disease and stroke symptoms.
● Women have unique risk factors for stroke: pregnancy, hormone therapy,
early menopause, and preeclampsia. Women are more likely than men to have
risk factors of atrial ﬁbrillation, migraine with aura, obesity, and metabolic
syndrome. Atrial ﬁbrillation, which increases stroke risk ﬁvefold in women, is
often asymptomatic and undetected. For these reasons, the 2014 AHA expert
panel on stroke prevention highlighted risk stratiﬁcation and appropriate
anticoagulation for women with atrial ﬁbrillation.60
●

In 2011, the AHA, recognizing the special cardiovascular risk faced by women,
adopted more speciﬁc CVD risk classiﬁcations. They recommended placing
women into one of three categories: high risk, at risk, and “ideal” cardiovascular
health.52

CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

361

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

American Heart Association Cardiovascular
Risk Categories for Women
High Risk

≥1 of the high-risk states, including existing CHD, CVD, peripheral arterial disease, abdominal aortic aneurysm, diabetes mellitus, or end-stage or chronic
renal disease
● 10-year predicted risk of >10%
●

At Risk

≥1 major risk factors including smoking, blood pressure ≥120/≥80 or treated
hypertension, total cholesterol ≥200 mg/dL, HDL-c <50 mg/dL, or treated
dyslipidemia, obesity, poor diet, physical inactivity, or family history of
premature CVD
● Evidence of advanced subclinical atherosclerosis (e.g., coronary calciﬁcation,
carotid plaque, intima-media thickness), metabolic syndrome, or poor exercise capacity on a treadmill test
● Systemic autoimmune collagen vascular disease (e.g., lupus or rheumatoid
arthritis)
● History or preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, or pregnancy-induced hypertension
●

Ideal Cardiovascular Health (All of These)

Total cholesterol <200 mg/dL (untreated)
BP <120/<80 (untreated)
● Fasting glucose <100 mg/dL (untreated)
● Body mass index <25 kg/m2
● Abstinence from smoking
● Physical activity at goal: ≥150 minutes/week moderate intensity, ≥75 minutes/
week vigorous intensity, or combination
● Healthy diet
●
●

Source: Mosca L, Benjamin EJ, Berra K, et al. Eﬀectiveness-based guidelines for the prevention of
CVD in women—2011 update: A guideline from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2011;
123:1243.

African Americans. CVD death rates show marked ethnic disparities: in
2013, they were 357 versus 271 per 100,000 for black men compared to white
men, and 247 versus 184 per 100,000 for black women compared to white
women.32 Overall, about 40% of white adults have ≥three of the seven AHA
cardiovascular health metrics (see above) at ideal levels compared to about 30%
of black adults.32 Selected striking CVD disparities are shown on next page. The
high prevalence of high cholesterol, obesity, and diabetes in Mexican Americans
places them at similar risk to blacks.

362

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

Cardiovascular Diseases and Risk Factors:
Prevalence in U.S. White and Black Adults
Men
Total Cardiovascular
Disease
Coronary Heart Disease
Hypertension
Stroke
Diabetes (Physician
Diagnosed)
Overweight/Obesity
Cholesterol ≥200 mg/dL
Smoking
Physical Activity
(Meeting Federal
Aerobic Guidelines)

Women

White

Black

White

Black

36.1%

46.0%

31.9%

48.3%

7.8%
32.9%
2.2%
7.6%

7.2%
44.9%
4.2%
13.8%

4.6%
30.1%
2.5%
6.1%

7.0%
46.1%
4.7%
14.6%

72.7%
39.9%
21.7%
57.0%

69.4%
37.4%
21.1%
49.8%

61.2%
45.9%
18.7%
50.0%

81.9%
40.7%
15.0%
34.6%

Sources: Mozaﬀarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, et al. Heart Disease and Stroke Statistics—2016 Update:
A Report From the American Heart Association. Circulation 2016;133:e38; Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention. Prevalence of coronary heart disease—United States, 2006–2010. MMWR Morb
Mortal Wkly Rep. 2011;60:1377.

Screening for Cardiovascular Risk Factors
Step 1: Screen for Global Risk Factors. Begin routine screening at
20 years for individual risk factors or “global” risk of CVD and for any family
history of premature heart disease (age <55 years in ﬁrst-degree male relatives
and age <65 years in ﬁrst-degree female relatives). Recommended screening
intervals are listed below.

Major Cardiovascular Risk Factors and
Screening Frequency

Risk Factor

Screening
Frequency

Family history of
premature CVD
Cigarette smoking
Poor diet

Update regularly

Physical inactivity

At each visit

At each visit
At each visit

Goal

Cessation
Improved overall eating
pattern
30 minutes moderate
intensity daily
(continued )

CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

363

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

Major Cardiovascular Risk Factors and
Screening Frequency (continued )

Risk Factor

Screening
Frequency

Obesity, especially
central adiposity

At each visit

Hypertension

At each visit

Dyslipidemias

Every 5 years if low risk
Every 2 years if strong
risk
Every 3 years (if normal) beginning at
age 45 years; more
frequently at any age
if risk factors
At each visit

Diabetes

Pulse

Goal
BMI 20–25 kg/m2; waist
circumference:
≤40 inches for men,
≤35 inches for women
<140/90 for adults <60
years, adults >60
with diabetes or
chronic kidney disease; <150/90 for all
other adults age ≥60
years
Initiate statin therapy if
meeting ACC/AHA
guidelines
Prevent/delay diabetes
for those with HbA1c
of 5.7–6.4%

Identify and treat atrial
ﬁbrillation

Sources: Adapted from: Goﬀ DC, Jr., Lloyd-Jones DM, Bennett G, et al. 2013 ACC/AHA guideline on
the assessment of cardiovascular risk: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63(25 Pt B):2935;
Stone NJ, Robinson JG, Lichtenstein AH, et al. 2013 ACC/AHA guideline on the treatment of blood
cholesterol to reduce atherosclerotic cardiovascular risk in adults: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation.
2014;129:S1; James PA, Oparil S, Carter BL, et al. 2014 evidence-based guideline for the management of high blood pressure in adults: report from the panel members appointed to the Eighth
Joint National Committee (JNC 8). JAMA. 2014;311:507; Meschia JF, Bushnell C, Boden-Albala B, et
al. Guidelines for the primary prevention of stroke: a statement for healthcare professionals from
the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2014;45:3754; Flack JM, Sica
DA, Bakris G, et al. Management of high blood pressure in Blacks: an update of the International
Society on Hypertension in Blacks consensus statement. Hypertension. 2010;56:780; American
Diabetes A. Executive summary: Standards of medical care in diabetes—2014. Diabetes Care. 2014;
37 Suppl 1:S5.

Step 2: Calculate 10-Year and Lifetime CVD Risk Using an Online
Calculator. Use the CVD risk calculators to establish 10-year and lifetime
risk for patients ages 40 to 79 years. The most recent ACC/AHA Cholesterol
Guideline provides a new risk-assessment calculator.61

364

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

CVD Risk Calculators
●
●

http://my.americanheart.org/cvriskcalculator
http://www.acc.org/tools-and-practice-support/mobile-resources/
features/2013-prevention-guidelines-ascvd-risk-estimator?w_nav=S.

The risk estimates, which incorporate age, gender, smoking history, total cholesterol level, HDL cholesterol level, systolic blood pressure, antihypertensive therapy, and diabetes, are based on pooled data from population-based studies. The
new calculators provide gender and race-speciﬁc risk estimates for a ﬁrst MI,
CHD death, or fatal or nonfatal stroke.
Step 3: Track Individual Risk Factors—Hypertension, Diabetes,
Dyslipidemias, Metabolic Syndrome, Smoking, Family History, and
Obesity
Hypertension. About one third of U.S. adults over the age of 20 years have
hypertension (deﬁned as a blood pressure ≥140/90 mm Hg), representing
nearly 80 million people.32 Over 40% of U.S. cardiovascular mortality and 30%
of overall mortality is attributed to hypertension, representing an estimated
362,000 deaths in 2010.47,62
■ Primary (essential) hypertension is the most common cause of hypertension:

risk factors include age, genetics, black race, obesity and weight gain, excessive salt intake, physical inactivity, and excessive alcohol use.
■ Secondary hypertension accounts for less than 5% of hypertension cases.

Causes include sleep apnea, chronic kidney disease, renal artery stenosis,
medications, thyroid disease, parathyroid disease, Cushing syndrome, hyperaldosteronism, pheochromocytoma, and coarctation of the aorta.
While the prevalence of hypertension is similar between men and women,
prevalence in blacks is substantially higher than in whites. Most hypertensive
adults know of their diagnosis, though only about 75% are taking medications
and only half have achieved their target blood pressure goal.56,63 The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) has issued a grade A recommendation
for hypertension screening among adults 18 years and older.64 The American
Society of Hypertension68 and Seventh Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure69 have suggested categories for classifying blood pressure readings (Table).

In 2014, the Eighth Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure issued updated guidelines shown
with strength of evidence for speciﬁc recommendations on the next page.65
These recommendations have not been universally accepted, even among
members of the Joint National Committee.66–68

CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

365

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

Blood Pressure Classiﬁcation for Adults—JNC 7,
American Society of Hypertension
Category

Systolic (mm Hg)

Diastolic (mm Hg)

Normal
Prehypertension
Stage 1 hypertension
Age ≥18 to <60 yrs
Age ≥60 yrsa
Stage 2 hypertension
If diabetes or renal disease
(including age ≥60 yrs)

<120
120–139

<80
80–89

140–159
150–159
≥160
<140

90–99
90–99
≥100
<90

a

The American Society of Hypertension raises this cutoﬀ to age ≥80 years.
Sources: Weber MA, Schiﬀrin EL, White WB, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the management
of hypertension in the community: A statement by the American Society of Hypertension and the
International Society of Hypertension. J Clin Hypertens. 2014;16:14; Chobanian AV, Bakris GL, Black
HR, et al. The Seventh Report of the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation,
and Treatment of High Blood Pressure—The JNC 7 Report. JAMA. 2003;289:2560. Available at
http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health-pro/guidelines/current/

JNC 8: Indications and Strength of Evidence
for Initiating Pharmacologic Therapy to
Lower Blood Pressure
Age ≥60 years
Age <60 years

Age >18 years with
chronic kidney disease or diabetes

Systolic blood pressure ≥150 mm Hg or diastolic blood
pressure ≥90 mm Hg (strong recommendation)
Systolic blood pressure ≥140 mm Hg (expert opinion)
Diastolic blood pressure ≥90 mm Hg (strong recommendation)
Systolic blood pressure ≥140 mm Hg or diastolic blood
pressure ≥90 mm Hg (expert opinion)

See Chapter 4, Beginning the Physical
Examination: General Survey, Vital
Signs, and Pain, pp. 118–119, for
discussion of the benefits of
restricting dietary sodium to <2,300
mg/day and increasing physical
activity for CVD risk reduction and
control of hypertension.70

Source: James PA, Oparil S, Carter BL, et al. 2014 evidence-based guideline for the management of
high blood pressure in adults: report from the panel members appointed to the Eighth Joint National
Committee (JNC 8). JAMA. 2014;311:507.

The AHA, ACC, and the American Society of Hypertension issued guidelines in
2015 for treating hypertension in patients with existing coronary artery disease.
A blood pressure of <140/90 mm Hg is an appropriate goal for most patients
with coronary artery disease, congestive heart failure, or acute coronary syndrome. Lowering blood pressure below 130/80 mm Hg may be appropriate for
some patients with coronary artery disease, previous heart attacks, history of
stroke or transient ischemic attack, carotid artery disease, peripheral arterial
disease, or abdominal aortic aneurysm.71

366

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Public health efforts such as the “Million Hearts” initiative have targeted blood
pressure control as an important step in reducing cardiovascular morbidity and
mortality.72
Diabetes. Diabetes wreaks devastating health consequences in the United
States and worldwide. The dramatic increase in obesity coupled with physical
inactivity has created an epidemic of diabetes. The CDC estimated that in 2012,
diabetes affected over 12% of U.S. adults, or nearly 29 million people.73 This
ﬁgure includes over 8 million adults who are undiagnosed. Another 86 million
adults (37% of the population) have prediabetes. The total prevalence of diabetes
in the United States is expected to double by 2050.

26.5%

26.1%

Treated and controlled
Treated and uncontrolled

8.0%

Not treated, but aware
39.5%

Not treated and undiagnosed

F I G U R E 9 - 2 2 . Treatment of diabetes. Source: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
(NHANES) 2011–2012 in Go AS, Mozaffarian D, Roger VL, et al. Heart disease and stroke statistics—2014 update: a report from
the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2014;129:e28. Available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24352519. Accessed
April 5, 2015.

There are striking disparities in the age-adjusted diabetes prevalences among
adults: 7% to 9% of whites and Asian Americans compared to ∼13% of Hispanics and blacks, rising to 16% of American Indian/Alaska Natives.73 Unfortunately, as shown in Figure 9-22, only 25% of those affected are treated and
controlled, and diabetes is associated with a two-fold increased risk of CVD
events and mortality.
Although diabetes unequivocally increases the risk of CVD, early detection and
treatment has not been ﬁrmly established to improve cardiovascular outcomes.
Nonetheless, the 2015 American Diabetes Association guidelines support screening and then diagnosing diabetes if fasting glucose is ≥126 mg/dL and HbA1c
values exceed 6.5%.74 Diagnostic criteria for diabetes and prediabetes, as well as
screening guidelines, are shown on the next page. Screening should be initiated
at age 45 years and repeated at 3-year intervals. Screening should be initiated at
any age for adults having a BMI of ≥25 and additional risk factors.

CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

367

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

American Diabetes Association 2015:
Classiﬁcation and Diagnosis of Diabetes
Screening Criteria

Healthy adults with no risk factors: begin at age 45 years, repeat at 3-year intervals
Adults with BMI ≥25 kg/m2 and additional risk factors:
● Physical inactivity
● First-degree relative with diabetes
● Members of a high-risk ethnic population—African American, Hispanic/
Latino American, Asian American, Paciﬁc Islander
● Mothers of infants ≥4.08 kg (9 lb) at birth or diagnosed with gestational diabetes
● Hypertension ≥140/90 mm Hg or on therapy for hypertension
● HDL cholesterol <35 mg/dL and/or triglycerides >250 mg/dL
● Women with polycystic ovary syndrome
● HbA1c ≥5.7%, impaired glucose tolerance, or impaired fasting glucose on previous testing
● Other conditions associated with insulin resistance such as severe obesity,
acanthosis nigricans
● History of CVD

Diagnostic Criteria

Diabetesa

Prediabetes

HbA1c
Fasting plasma glucose (on at
least 2 occasions)
2-hour plasma glucose (oral
glucose tolerance test)
Random glucose, if classic
symptoms

≥6.5%
≥126 mg/dL

5.7–6.4%
100–125 mg/dL

≥200 mg/dL

140–199 mg/dL

≥200 mg/dL

a
In the absence of classic symptoms, an abnormal test must be repeated to conﬁrm the diagnosis.
However, if two diﬀerent tests are both abnormal then no additional testing is necessary.

Source: American Diabetes Association. Classiﬁcation and diagnosis of diabetes. Diabetes Care.
2015;38(Suppl):S8.

Dyslipidemias. The USPSTF has issued a grade A recommendation for routine lipid screening for all men of age >35 years and women >45 years who are
at increased risk for CHD.75 The Task Force also issued a grade B recommendation to screen for lipid disorders beginning at age 20 years for men and women
who have diabetes, hypertension, obesity, tobacco use, noncoronary atherosclerosis, or family history of early CVD. These recommendations are currently being
updated.

In 2014, the ACC/AHA published “a guideline on the treatment of blood
cholesterol to reduce atherosclerotic cardiovascular risk in adults.”61 This
guideline offers evidence-based recommendations on using statins to treat

368

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
cholesterol in high-risk groups (Fig. 9-23). Persons with clinical atherosclerotic CVD include “those with an acute coronary syndrome and those with a
history of MI, stable or unstable, angina, coronary of other arterial revascularization, or stroke, transient ischemic attack, or peripheral arterial disease …
of atherosclerotic origin.” In addition, the ACC/AHA provides a calculator for
clinicians and patients to estimate 10-year and lifetime gender and race-speciﬁc
risks for CHD and stroke events to guide statin use for primary prevention:
ACC/AHA Risk Calculator, http://tools.cardiosource.org/ASCVD-Risk-Estimator/
(see also p. 365).

Patients age >21 yr without heart failure (New York Heart Association
class II, III, or IV) or end-stage renal disease (undergoing hemodialysis)
Screen for cardiovascular risk factors
Measure LDL cholesterol

Clinical atherosclerotic
CVD

Diabetes mellitus (type 1 or
type 2) and age 40–75 yr and
LDL cholesterol 70–189 mg/dl

No diabetes mellitus
and age 40–75 yr and
LDL cholesterol 70–189 mg/dl

LDL cholesterol ≥190 mg/dl

High-intensity statin therapy

Calculate 10-yr risk of atherosclerotic CVD

Calculate 10-yr risk of atherosclerotic CVD

High-intensity statin therapy

If risk >5% to <7.5%, moderateintensity statin therapy
If risk ≥7.5%, high-intensity
statin therapy

FIGURE 9-23.

If risk ≥7.5%, moderate-tohigh-intensity statin therapy

American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association cholesterol guideline, 2013.76

Use the CVD risk calculators to establish 10-year risk. The most recent ACC/AHA
Cholesterol Guideline provides evidence-based recommendations for initiating
statin therapy based on risk level.61 The recommendations shown in Figure 9-23
are brieﬂy summarized below. The guideline notes that high-intensity therapy
lowers LDL by about 50% and moderate-intensity therapy lowers LDL by 30%
to 50%.
■ For patients with clinical CVD (secondary prevention) or LDL cholesterol levels

>190 mg/dL (primary prevention)—prescribe high-intensity statin therapy.

■ For patients with diabetes and/or LDL cholesterol levels from 70 to 189 mg/

dL—determine the 10-year risk of atherosclerotic CVD with the new risk
calculator (see above). Although the evidence for initiating statins for primary prevention is stronger for adults with 10-year risks above 7.5%, statins
can also be considered for risk levels between 5% and <7.5%.
■ However, the guideline also states that clinicians and patients should engage

in shared decision making, addressing the potential beneﬁts and harms of
prescribing statins and eliciting patient preferences before initiating therapy.
The guideline ﬁrmly emphasizes the importance of encouraging all patients
to adhere to a healthy lifestyle.
CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

369

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

The Metabolic Syndrome. The metabolic syndrome consists of a cluster of risk
factors that increase risk of both CVD and diabetes. In 2009, the International
Diabetes Association, the National Heart Lung Blood Institute, the AHA, and
other societies established diagnostic criteria as the presence of ≥three of the
ﬁve risk factors listed below.77 The prevalence of this syndrome in U.S. adults
≥20 years of age is approximately 34%.46

Metabolic Syndrome: 2009 Diagnostic Criteria—
Must Meet ≥3 of 5
Waist circumference
Fasting plasma glucose
HDL cholesterol
Triglycerides
Blood pressure

Men ≥102 cm, women ≥88 cm
≥100 mg/dL, or being treated for elevated glucose
Men <40 mg/dL, women <50 mg/dL, or being
treated with drugs
≥150 mg/dL, or being treated with drugs
≥130/≥85 mm Hg, or being treated with drugs

Source: Alberti KG, Eckel RH, Grundy SM, et al. Harmonizing the metabolic syndrome: a joint
interim statement of the International Diabetes Federation Task Force on Epidemiology and
Prevention; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; American Heart Association; World Heart
Federation; International Atherosclerosis Society; and International Association for the Study of
Obesity. Circulation. 2009;120:1640.

Other Risk Factors: Smoking, Family History, and Obesity. Risk factors such as
smoking, family history, and obesity contribute substantially to the population
burden of CVD.46,78 Smoking increases the risk of CHD and stroke by two- to
fourfold compared to nonsmokers or past smokers who quit >10 years previously. About 14% of the annual cardiovascular deaths in the population, or over
150,000 deaths, are attributed to smoking. Among adults, 13% report a family history of heart attack or angina before age 50 years. Along with a family history of
premature revascularization, this risk factor is associated with about a 50% increased
lifetime risk for CHD and for CVD mortality. Obesity, or BMI over 30 kg/m2,
contributed to 112,000 excess adult deaths compared to those of normal weight,
and was associated with 13% of CVD deaths in 2004.

Promoting Lifestyle Change and Risk Factor Modiﬁcation.
Motivating behavior change is challenging, but it is an essential clinical skill for
risk factor reduction. Promoting cardiovascular health is a high priority for
Healthy People 2020. Objectives include increases in physical activity and
reductions in: the prevalence of hypertension, tobacco use, and obesity;
consumption of calories from solid fats and added sugars; and CHD deaths.79
The well-known Prochaska model is a useful tool for assessing patient “readiness
to change” and tailoring advice to the patient’s level of motivation.80

See Table 4-4, Obesity: Stages of
Change Model and Assessing Readiness, p. 142, and Chapter 8, Thorax
and Lungs, pp. 303–342, for examples
of how this model can be applied to
clinical counseling.

The USPSTF has given a B recommendation for referring adults with cardiovascular risk factors to behavioral counseling interventions that encourage a
healthy diet and physical activity.81 The ACC/AHA recommendations on lifestyle management address diet, physical activity, body weight, and tobacco
avoidance, as well as controlling hypertension and diabetes.82
370

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Hypertension. Encourage your patients to adopt the recommendations
for pertinent lifestyle modiﬁcations listed below.

Lifestyle Modiﬁcations to Prevent or
Manage Hypertension
Optimal weight, or BMI of 18.5 to 24.9 kg/m2
● Intake of <6 g of sodium chloride or 2.3 g of sodium per day
● Regular aerobic exercise such as brisk walking three to four times a week,
averaging 40 minutes per session
● Moderate alcohol consumption per day of ≤2 drinks for men and ≤1 drink for
women (2 drinks = 1 oz ethanol, 24 oz beer, 10 oz wine, or 2 to 3 oz whiskey)
● Diet rich in fruits, vegetables, whole grains, and low-fat dairy products with
reduced intake of saturated and total fat, sweets, and red meats
●

Source: Eckel RH, Jakicic JM, Ard JD, et al. 2013 AHA/ACC guideline on lifestyle management to
reduce cardiovascular risk: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;129:S76.

Tobacco Use. Ask every patient “Do you smoke or use tobacco products?” and then ask tobacco users “Do you want to quit?” Use the “5 As” framework and the Stages of Change model described in Chapter 8 to develop
strategies for quitting. Encourage patients to use services that increase quit
rates like the National Smoking Cessation Hotline: 1-800-QUIT NOW. If the
patient is not using tobacco, ask whether they are former users. If so, encourage continued abstinence—and consider interventions to prevent relapse for
recent quitters.83

See discussion on Tobacco Cessation,
Chapter 8, Thorax and Lungs,
pp. 313–315.

Obesity: Healthy Eating and Weight Loss. Begin with a dietary history
to explore the patient’s eating habits, then target the importance of foods low in
total fat, especially foods low in saturated and trans fats. Foods with mono- and
polyunsaturated fats and the omega-3 fatty acids found in ﬁsh oils help lower
serum cholesterol. A Mediterranean diet (fruits, vegetables, seafood, white meat,
wine), supplemented by extra-virgin olive oil and nuts, has been shown to reduce
major cardiovascular events among high-risk patients.84 Review the food sources
of these healthy and unhealthy fats in the box below.

See discussion of Optimal Weight,
Nutrition, and Diet in Chapter 4,
Beginning the Physical Examination:
General Survey, Vital Signs, and Pain,
pp. 114–118.

Food Sources of Healthy and Unhealthy Fats
Healthy
Fats

Foods high in monounsaturated fat: nuts, such as almonds, pecans,
and peanuts; sesame seeds; avocados; canola, sunﬂower, high
oleic saﬄower, olive, and peanut oil; peanut butter85
Foods high in polyunsaturated fat: corn, cottonseed, and soybean
oil; walnuts; pumpkin or sunﬂower seeds; soft (tub)
margarine; mayonnaise; salad dressings
Foods high in omega-3 fatty acids: ﬂaxseed, walnuts, tuna, anchovies, herring, mackerel, rainbow trout, salmon, sardines, shrimp
(continued )

CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

371

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

Food Sources of Healthy and
Unhealthy Fats (continued )
Unhealthy
Fats

Foods high in saturated fat: high-fat dairy products—cream,
cheese, ice cream, whole and 2% milk, butter, and sour cream;
bacon; chocolate; coconut oil; lard and gravy from meat drippings; high-fat meats like ground beef, bologna, hot dogs, and
sausage
Foods high in trans fat: snacks and baked goods with hydrogenated
or partially hydrogenated oil, stick margarines, shortening, and
fried foods

Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Dietary
Guidelines for Americans, 2010. Washington, D.C., U.S. Government Printing Oﬃce. 7th ed. Available
at http://www.health.gov/dietaryguidelines/dga2010/DietaryGuidelines2010.pdf. Accessed March
30, 2015.

Less than 1% of the U.S. population meets most healthy dietary goals for fruits
and vegetables, ﬁsh, sodium, sugar-sweetened drinks, and whole grains. Nearly
35% of adult Americans are obese (BMI ≥30 kg/m2), an epidemic problem in
the United States since 1980.46 Healthy People 2020 targets reductions in the
proportions of obese children and adolescents and in caloric intake from solid
fats and added sugars.79
You should counsel patients about unhealthy weight. Assess BMI as described in
Chapter 4. Discuss the principles of healthy eating. Patients with a high fat intake
are more likely to accumulate body fat than those with diets high in protein and
carbohydrates. Help the patient to set realistic goals for diet and exercise that
promote healthy eating habits for life.
Physical Activity. About 12% of the population burden of CVD is attributed to insufﬁcient physical activity.56 A major goal of Healthy People 2020 is to
increase the proportion of people meeting federal physical activity targets for
aerobic and muscle strengthening activity.79
■ For aerobic activity, adults should perform at least 150 minutes (2 hours

and 30 minutes) of moderate-intensity cardiorespiratory activity, such as
brisk walking, each week.86 Markers that help patients recognize the onset
of aerobic metabolism include deep breathing, sweating in cool temperatures, and pulse rates exceeding 60% of the maximum normal age-adjusted
heart rate (220 minus the person’s age).
■ Muscle strengthening activities, which include resistance training and lifting

weights, can increase ﬁtness and bone strength. Activities strengthening all
the major muscle groups should be performed at least twice weekly.
■ Spur motivation by emphasizing the important beneﬁts to health and well-

being, even with just an hour of moderate-intensity activity each week—
”some is better than none.”

372

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Inactive adults should only gradually increase their activity toward the recommended goals to avoid injuries. Be sure to assess any pulmonary, cardiac, or
musculoskeletal conditions that may limit the patient’s exercise capacity.

Techniques of Examination
Turn now to the classic techniques for examining the heart and great vessels. A
sound knowledge of cardiovascular anatomy and physiology is key to understanding the hemodynamics of this closed-pump forward-ﬂow system. It is only
through diligent repetition, however, that you will gain conﬁdence in the accuracy of your clinical ﬁndings.22 Examine each patient carefully and methodically. Practice examining normal patients will help you recognize when patients
have important cardiac pathology. Knowing how well these ﬁndings, by themselves or in concert with others, predict the presence or absence of cardiac
disease is vitally important. The “test characteristics” of cardiac ﬁndings such as
sensitivity, speciﬁcity, and likelihood ratios, are provided when pertinent and
available. Students can also turn to several excellent resources for more detailed
information.87,88
As you practice the cardiac examination, be sure you are proﬁcient in the basic
objectives listed below.
Cardiac Examination Skills:
Objectives for Mastery
Describe the chest wall anatomy and identify the key listening areas.
Evaluate the jugular venous pulse, the carotid upstroke, and presence or
absence of carotid bruits.
● Palpate and describe the PMI.
● Auscultate S and S in six positions from the base to the apex.
1
2
● Recognize the eﬀect of the P-R interval on the intensity of S .
1
● Identify physiologic and paradoxical splitting of S .
2
● Auscultate and recognize abnormal sounds in early diastole, including an S
3
and OS of mitral stenosis.
● Auscultate and recognize an S later in diastole.
4
● Distinguish systolic and diastolic murmurs, using maneuvers when needed.
● Evaluate and interpret a paradoxical pulse.
●
●

BLOOD PRESSURE AND HEART RATE
The general appearance of the patient provides many clues to cardiac illness, so
pay special attention to the patient’s color, respiratory rate, and level of anxiety,
in addition to blood pressure and heart rate. Since auscultation is so important
for detecting subtle ﬁndings, examine the patient in a quiet comfortable room
where distractions and noise are at a minimum.
CHAPTER 9

See Chapter 4, Beginning the Physical
Examination: General Survey, Vital
Signs, and Pain, especially Blood
Pressure, pp. 124–132.

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

373

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

As you begin, review the blood pressure and heart rate recorded at the start of
the visit. If you need to repeat these measurements, or if they have not already
been done, measure the blood pressure and heart rate using optimal technique.89,90
In brief review, after letting the patient rest for at least 5 minutes in a quiet setting
with feet on the ﬂoor, choose a correctly sized cuff and position the patient’s
unclothed arm at heart level, either resting on a table if the patient is seated, or
supported at midchest level if supine or standing. Heart level is usually at the 4th
intercostal space at the sternum. Make sure the bladder of the cuff is centered
over the brachial artery. Inﬂate the cuff approximately 30 mm Hg above the pressure at which the brachial or radial pulse disappears. As you deﬂate the cuff,
listen ﬁrst for the Korotkoff sounds of at least two consecutive heartbeats; these
mark the systolic pressure. Then listen for the disappearance point of the heartbeats, which marks the diastolic pressure. For heart rate, palpate the radial pulse
using the pads of your index and middle ﬁngers, or auscultate the apical pulse
with your stethoscope.

At higher arm levels, the blood pressure recordings will be lower; at lower
levels, the blood pressure recordings
will be higher.
A growing literature documents the
poor reliability of clinic blood pressure measurements.91–94 Multiple
averaged measurements improve precision, especially when using automated home and ambulatory blood
pressure readings, which are more
reliable, accurate, and better correlated with cardiovascular outcomes
than clinic readings.

JUGULAR VENOUS PRESSURE
AND PULSATIONS
Jugular Venous Pressure
Identifying the JVP. Estimating the JVP is one of the most important and
frequently used skills of physical examination. The JVP closely parallels pressure
in the right atrium, or central venous pressure, related primarily to volume in the
venous system.95 The JVP is best assessed from pulsations in the right internal
jugular vein, which is directly in line with the superior vena cava and right
atrium.96–99 The internal jugular veins lie deep to the SCM muscles in the neck
and are not directly visible, so you must learn to identify the pulsations of the
internal jugular vein that are transmitted to the surface of the neck (Fig. 9-24).
Pulsations in the right external jugular vein can also be used,30 but the route from
the vena cava is more tortuous, and examination can be impaired by kinking and
obstruction at the base of the neck and by obesity.96,100 Note that the jugular
veins and pulsations are difﬁcult to see in children under 12 years of age, so
inspection is not useful in this age group.

See discussion of the double peak of
the a and v waves and of the x and y
descent on p. 378.
Although the JVP accurately predicts
elevations in fluid volume in heart
failure, its prognostic value for heart
failure outcomes and mortality is
unclear.101

Pressure changes from right atrial ﬁlling, contraction, and emptying cause ﬂuctuations in the JVP and its waveforms that are visible to the examiner. The dominant movement of the JVP is inward, coinciding with the x descent. 96 In
contrast, the dominant movement of the carotid pulse, often confused with the
JVP, is outward. Careful observation of the ﬂuctuations of the JVP yields clues
about volume status, right and left ventricular function, patency of the tricuspid
and pulmonary valves, pressures in the pericardium, and arrhythmias caused by
junctional rhythms and AV blocks. For example, JVP falls with loss of blood or
decreased venous vascular tone and increases with right or left heart failure,
pulmonary hypertension, tricuspid stenosis, AV dissociation, increased venous
vascular tone, and pericardial compression or tamponade.
374

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

Internal carotid
artery

External
carotid artery
Sternomastoid
Common carotid
artery
External jugular vein

Internal jugular vein

Subclavian vein

FIGURE 9-24.

Internal and external jugular veins.

The Oscillation Point of the JPV. To estimate the level of the JVP, learn
to ﬁnd the highest point of oscillation in the internal jugular vein or, alternatively, the
point above which the external jugular vein appears collapsed. The JVP is usually
measured in vertical distance above the sternal angle (also called the angle of
Louis), the bony ridge adjacent to the second rib where the manubrium joins the
body of the sternum.

Study carefully the illustrations in Figure 9-25. Note that in the three positions,
the sternal angle remains roughly 5 cm above the right midatrium. In this patient,
the pressure in the internal jugular vein is somewhat elevated.

Some authors report that at 30° to
45°, the estimated JVP may be 3 cm
lower than catheter measurements
from the right midatrium.102,103

Height of venous
pressure from
sternal angle
5 cm

A 30˚
FIGURE 9-25.

B 60˚

C 90˚

JVP height remains relatively constant.

CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

375

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ In Position A, the head of the bed is raised to the usual level, approximately

30°, but the JVP cannot be measured because the level of oscillation, or meniscus, is above the jaw and, therefore, not visible.
■ In Position B, the head of the bed is raised to 60°. The “top” of the internal

jugular vein is now easily visible, so the vertical distance from the sternal
angle or right atrium can now be measured.
■ In Position C, the patient is upright and the veins are barely discernible above

the clavicle, making measurement untenable.
Note that the height of the venous pressure as measured from the sternal angle
is similar in all three positions, but your ability to measure the height of the column of venous blood, or JVP, differs according to how you position the patient.
JVP measured at >3 cm above the sternal angle, or >8 cm above the right atrium,
is considered elevated or abnormal.
The JVP and Volume Status. As you begin your assessment, consider
the patient’s volume status and whether you need to alter the elevation of the
head of the bed or examining table.
■ The usual starting position for the head of the bed or examining table when

assessing the JVP is 30°. Turn the patient’s head slightly to the left, then the
right, and identify the external jugular vein on each side. Then focus on the
internal jugular venous pulsations on the right, transmitted from deep in
the neck to the overlying soft tissues. The JVP is the highest oscillation
point, or meniscus, of the jugular venous pulsations that is usually evident
in euvolemic patients.
■ If the patient is hypovolemic, you can anticipate that the JVP will be low, caus-

ing you to lower the head of the bed, sometimes even to 0°, to see the point of
oscillation best.
■ Likewise, if the patient is volume-overloaded, or hypervolemic, anticipate that

the JVP will be high, causing you to raise the head of the bed.

A hypovolemic or septic patient may
have to lie flat before you see the neck
veins. In contrast, when there is volume overload, you may need to elevate the patient’s head to 60° or even
90° to locate the oscillation point.

Measuring the JVP. To help you learn the techniques for this challenging portion of the cardiac examination, steps for assessing the JVP are outlined
below.

Steps for Measuring the
Jugular Venous Pressure
1. Make the patient comfortable. Raise the head slightly on a pillow to relax the
SCM muscles.
2. Raise the head of the bed or examining table to about 30°. Turn the patient’s
head slightly away from the side you are inspecting.
(continued )

376

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

Steps for Measuring the
Jugular Venous Pressure (continued )
3. Use tangential lighting and examine both sides of the neck. Identify the external jugular vein on each side, then ﬁnd the internal jugular venous pulsations.
4. If necessary, raise or lower the head of the bed until you can see the oscillation
point or meniscus of the internal jugular venous pulsations in the lower half
of the neck.
5. Focus on the right internal jugular vein. Look for pulsations in the suprasternal notch, between the attachments of the SCM muscle on the sternum
and clavicle, or just posterior to the SCM. Distinguish the pulsations of the
internal jugular vein from those of the carotid artery (see box below).
6. Identify the highest point of pulsation in the right jugular vein. Extend a long
rectangular object or card horizontally from this point and a centimeter
ruler vertically from the sternal angle, making an exact right angle. Measure the vertical distance in centimeters above the sternal angle where
the horizontal object crosses the ruler and add to this distance 5 cm, the
distance from the sternal angle to the center of the right atrium. The sum
is the JVP.

Distinguishing Jugular Venous Pulsations from Carotid Pulsations. The following features help to distinguish jugular from carotid artery
pulsations.98

Distinguishing Internal Jugular and
Carotid Pulsations
Internal Jugular Pulsations

Carotid Pulsations

Rarely palpable
Soft biphasic undulating quality, usually with two elevations and characteristic inward deﬂection (x descent)
Pulsations eliminated by light pressure
on the vein(s) just above the sternal
end of the clavicle
Height of pulsations changes with
position, normally dropping as the
patient becomes more upright
Height of pulsations usually falls with
inspiration

Palpable
A more vigorous thrust with a single
outward component
Pulsations not eliminated by pressure
on veins at sternal end of clavicle
Height of pulsations unchanged by
position
Height of pulsations not aﬀected by
inspiration

Establishing the true vertical and horizontal lines to measure the JVP is difﬁcult.
Place the zero point of your ruler on the sternal angle and line it up with a vertical edge in the room. Then place a card or rectangular object at an exact right
angle to the ruler (Fig. 9-26). This constitutes your horizontal line. Move it up
or down—still horizontal—so that the lower edge rests at the top of the jugular
pulsations, and read the vertical distance on the ruler. Round your measurement
off to the nearest centimeter.
CHAPTER 9

An elevated JVP is highly correlated
with both acute and chronic heart failure.102,104–110 It is also seen in tricuspid
stenosis, chronic pulmonary hypertension, superior vena cava obstruction,
cardiac tamponade, and constrictive
pericarditis.111–113

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

377

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

In patients with obstructive lung disease, the JVP can appear elevated on
expiration, but the veins collapse on
inspiration. This finding does not
indicate heart failure.

FIGURE 9-26.

Measure the JVP with a horizontal card and vertical ruler.

JVP measured at >3 cm above the sternal angle, or more than 8 cm in total
distance above the right atrium, is considered elevated above normal.

The highest point of venous pulsations may lie below the level of the sternal
angle. Under these circumstances, venous pressure is not elevated and seldom
needs to be measured.

An elevated JVP is >95% specific for
an increased left ventricular end diastolic pressure and low left ventricular
EF, although its role as a predictor of
hospitalization and death from heart
failure is less clear.102,114

Jugular Venous Pulsations. Oscillations in the right internal jugular
vein, and often in the external jugular vein, reﬂect changing pressures in the
right atrium. Careful inspection of these waveforms reveals two quick peaks and
two troughs, diagrammed in Figure 9-27. Considerable practice and experience
are required to discern these ﬂuctuations.
■ The ﬁrst elevation, the presystolic a wave, reﬂects the slight rise in atrial pres-

sure that accompanies atrial contraction. It occurs just prior to S1 and before
the carotid upstroke.
■ The following trough, the x descent, starts with atrial relaxation. It continues

as the RV, contracting during systole, pulls the ﬂoor of the atrium downward,
and ends just before S2. During ventricular systole, blood continues to ﬂow
into the right atrium from the venae cavae.
■ The tricuspid valve is closed, the chamber begins to ﬁll, and right atrial pres-

sure begins to rise again, creating the second elevation, the v wave. When the
tricuspid valve opens early in diastole, blood in the right atrium ﬂows passively into the RV, and right atrial pressure falls again, creating the second
trough, or y descent.
378

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

FIGURE 9-27.

Jugular venous pulsations. (Adapted with permission from Douglas G, Nicol F,
Robertson C. Macleod’s Clinical Examination, 13th ed. London: Elsevier, 2013.)

■ A simpliﬁed way to remember the three peaks is: a for atrial contraction, c

for carotid transmission (although this may represent closure of the tricuspid valve),102 and v for venous ﬁlling. To the naked eye, the two descents, x
and y, are the most visible events in the cycle of atrial contraction, atrial relaxation, atrial ﬁlling, and atrial emptying again followed by atrial contraction. Of the two, the sudden collapse of the x descent late in systole is more
prominent, occurring just before S2. The y descent follows S2 early in diastole.

Observe the amplitude and timing of the jugular venous pulsations. To time them, feel
the left carotid artery with your right thumb or listen to the heart simultaneously.
The a wave just precedes S1 and the carotid pulse, the x descent can be seen as a
systolic collapse, the v wave almost coincides with S2, and the y descent follows
early in diastole. Look for absent or unusually prominent waves.

Abnormally prominent a waves occur in
increased resistance to right atrial contraction, as in tricuspid stenosis; also in
severe 1st-, 2nd-, and 3rd-degree AV
block, supraventricular tachycardia,
junctional tachycardia, pulmonary
hypertension, and pulmonic stenosis.
Absent a waves signal atrial fibrillation.
Increased v waves occur in tricuspid
regurgitation, atrial septal defects, and
constrictive pericarditis.

CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

379

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

THE CAROTID PULSE
Next, examine the carotid pulse, including the carotid upstroke, its amplitude
and contour, and the presence or absence of thrills or bruits. The carotid pulse
provides valuable information about cardiac function, especially aortic valve stenosis and regurgitation.

For irregular rhythms, see Table 9-1,
Selected Heart Rates and Rhythms,
p. 400, and Table 9-2, Selected Irregular Rhythms, p. 401.

To assess amplitude and contour, the patient should be supine with the head of the
bed elevated to about 30°. First inspect the neck for carotid pulsations, often
visible just medial to the SCM muscles. Then place your index and middle
ﬁngers (Fig. 9-28) or left thumb (Fig. 9-29) on the right carotid artery in the
lower third of the neck and palpate for pulsations.

A tortuous and kinked carotid artery
may produce a unilateral pulsatile
bulge.

Causes of decreased pulsations include
decreased stroke volume from shock or
MI and local atherosclerotic narrowing
or occlusion.

F I G U R E 9 - 2 8 . Palpate the carotid
pulse with index and middle ﬁngers.

FIGURE 9-29.
thumb.

Palpate with the

Press just inside the medial border of a relaxed SCM muscle, roughly at the level
of the cricoid cartilage. Avoid pressing on the carotid sinus, which lies adjacent to
the top of the thyroid cartilage. For the left carotid artery, use your right ﬁngers
or thumb. Never palpate both carotid arteries at the same time. This may
decrease blood ﬂow to the brain and induce syncope.

Pressure on the carotid sinus may
cause reflex bradycardia or drop in
blood pressure.

Slowly increase pressure until you feel a maximal pulsation; then slowly decrease
pressure until you best sense the arterial pressure and contour. Assess the pulse
characteristics listed below.

See Table 9-3, Abnormalities of the
Arterial Pulse and Pressure Waves,
p. 402.

Assessment Characteristics of the
Carotid Pulse
●

●

The amplitude of the pulse. This correlates reasonably well with the pulse pressure.

The carotid pulse is small, thready, or
weak in cardiogenic shock; the pulse
is bounding in aortic regurgitation
(see p. 411).

The contour of the pulse wave, namely the speed of the upstroke, the duration of its
summit, and the speed of the downstroke. The normal upstroke is brisk; it is
smooth, rapid, and follows S1 almost immediately. The summit is smooth, rounded,
and roughly midsystolic. The downstroke is less abrupt than the upstroke.

The carotid upstroke is delayed in
aortic stenosis.

(continued )

380

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

Assessment Characteristics of the
Carotid Pulse (continued )
●

●

Any variations in amplitude, either from beat to beat or with respiration.

The timing of the carotid upstroke in relation to S1 and S2. Note that the normal
carotid upstroke follows S1 and precedes S2. This relationship is very
helpful in correctly identifying S1 and S2, especially when the heart rate is
increased and the duration of diastole, normally longer than systole, is shortened and approaches the duration of systole.

Pulsus alternans and a bigeminal
pulse vary beat to beat; a paradoxical
pulse varies with respiration,
described below.

Pulsus Alternans. In pulsus alternans, the rhythm of the pulse remains
regular, but the force of the arterial pulse alternates because of alternating strong
and weak ventricular contractions. Pulsus alternans almost always indicates
severe left ventricular dysfunction. It is usually best felt by applying light
pressure on the radial or femoral arteries. Use a blood pressure cuff to conﬁrm
your ﬁnding. After raising the cuff pressure, lower it slowly to just below the
systolic level. The initial Korotkoff sounds are the strong beats. As you lower
the cuff, you will hear the softer sounds of the alternating weak beats, which
will eventually disappear, causing the remaining Korotkoff sounds to double.

Alternately loud and soft Korotkoff
sounds or a sudden doubling of the
apparent heart rate as the cuff pressure declines signals pulsus alternans
(see p. 402).

Paradoxical Pulse. This is a greater than normal drop in systolic blood
pressure during inspiration. If the pulse varies in amplitude with respiration or
you suspect cardiac tamponade (because of jugular venous distention, dyspnea,
tachycardia, mufﬂed heart tones, and hypotension), use a blood pressure cuff to
check for a paradoxical pulse. As the patient breathes quietly, lower the cuff
pressure to the systolic level. Note the pressure level at which the ﬁrst sounds
can be heard. Then drop the pressure very slowly until sounds can be heard
throughout the respiratory cycle. Again note the pressure level. The difference
between these two levels is normally no greater than 3 or 4 mm Hg.

The pressure when Korotkoff sounds
are first heard is the highest systolic
pressure during the respiratory cycle.
The pressure when sounds are heard
throughout the cycle is the lowest systolic pressure. A difference between
these levels of ≥10 mm Hg to 12 mm Hg
constitutes a paradoxical pulse, found
most commonly in acute asthma and
obstructive pulmonary disease (see
p. 402). It also occurs in pericardial tamponade and at times in constrictive pericarditis and acute pulmonary embolism.

Carotid Artery Thrills and Bruits. As you palpate the carotid artery,
you may detect vibrations, or thrills, like the throat vibrations of a cat when it
purrs. Proceed to auscultation.

Thrills in aortic stenosis are transmitted to the carotid arteries from the
suprasternal notch or 2nd right intercostal space.

Auscultate both the carotid arteries to listen for a bruit, a murmur-like sound
arising from turbulent arterial blood ﬂow. Ask the patient to stop breathing for
∼15 seconds, then listen with the diaphragm of the stethoscope, which generally
detects the higher frequency sounds of arterial bruits better than the bell.115 Note
that higher-grade stenoses may have lower frequency or even absent sounds,
more amenable to detection with the bell. Place the diaphragm near the upper
end of the thyroid cartilage below the angle of the jaw, which overlies the bifurcation of the common carotid artery into the external and internal carotid arteries.
A bruit in this location is less likely to be confused with a transmitted murmur
from the heart or subclavian or vertebral artery bruits.

Although usually caused by atherosclerotic luminal stenosis, bruits are also
caused by a tortuous carotid artery,
external carotid arterial disease, aortic
stenosis, the hypervascularity of hyperthyroidism, and external compression
from thoracic outlet syndrome. Bruits
do not correlate with clinically significant underlying disease.116–118

CHAPTER 9

Placing the patient in the upright
position may accentuate this finding.

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

381

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Listen for bruits in older patients and patients with suspected cerebrovascular
disease.

Carotid artery stenosis causes ∼10% of
ischemic strokes and doubles the risk of
CHD.119–121 The prevalence of asymptomatic carotid stenosis in the United
States is ∼1% for stenoses occluding
75% to 90% of the lumen, and increases
significantly with age.119,122,123 The
5-year risk of ipsilateral stroke from
asymptomatic stenoses of over 70%
is ∼5%.

Because auscultation has low sensitivity and speciﬁcity for detecting asymptomatic carotid disease (46% to 77% and 71% to 98%) and there are high rates of
false positives with ultrasound, the USPSTF recommends against routine screening.124 Consider further evaluation for high-risk groups.125–128

The Brachial Artery.
In patients with carotid
obstruction, kinking, or
thrills, assess the pulse in
the brachial artery, applying
the techniques described
previously for determining
amplitude and contour.

The patient’s arm should rest
with the elbow extended,
palm up. Cup your hand
under the patient’s elbow or
support the forearm. You
may need to ﬂex the elbow
to a varying degree to get
optimal muscular relaxation. F I G U R E 9 - 3 0 . Palpate the brachial pulse.
Use the index and middle
ﬁngers or thumb of your opposite hand for palpation. Feel for the pulse just
medial to the biceps tendon (Fig. 9-30).

THE HEART
Positioning the Patient. For the cardiac examination, stand at the
patient’s right side. The patient should be supine, with the upper body and head
of the bed or examining table raised to about 30°. To assess the PMI and extra
heart sounds such as S3 or S4, ask the patient to turn to the left side, termed the
left lateral decubitus position—this brings the ventricular apex closer to the
chest wall. To bring the left ventricular outﬂow tract closer to the chest wall
and improve detection of aortic regurgitation, have the patient sit up, lean
forward, and exhale. The box on next page summarizes patient positions and a
suggested sequence for the examination.

382

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

Sequence of the Cardiac Examination
Patient Position

Examination

Supine, with the head
elevated 30°

After examining the JVP and carotid pulse, inspect
and palpate the precordium: the 2nd right and left
interspaces; the RV; and the LV, including the apical
impulse (diameter, location, amplitude, duration).
Palpate the apical impulse to assess its diameter. Listen at the apex with the bell of the stethoscope.
Listen at the 2nd right and left interspaces, down the
left sternal border to the 4th and 5th interspaces,
and across to the apex the six listening areas with
the diaphragm, then the bell (see p. 391). As indicated, listen at the lower right sternal border for
right-sided murmurs and sounds, often accentuated with inspiration, with the diaphragm and bell.
Listen down the left sternal border and at the apex
with the diaphragm.

Left lateral decubitus
Supine, with the head
elevated 30°

Sitting, leaning forward,
after full exhalation

Accentuated Findings

Low-pitched extra sounds such as an
S3, opening snap, diastolic rumble of
mitral stenosis

Soft decrescendo higher-pitched diastolic murmur of aortic regurgitation

Location and Timing of Cardiac Findings. Identify both the
anatomical location of impulses, heart sounds, and murmurs and where they fall
in the cardiac cycle. Remember to integrate your ﬁndings with the characteristics
of the patient’s JVP and carotid upstroke.
■ Identify the anatomical location of cardiac ﬁndings in terms of interspaces and

the distance of the PMI from the midclavicular (or midsternal) line. The
midsternal line offers the most reproducible zero point for measurement, but
some experts recommend the midclavicular line due to its better correlation
with left ventricular pathology, as long as the midpoint between the acromioclavicular and sternoclavicular joints is carefully identiﬁed.129
■ Identify the timing of impulses, sounds, and murmurs in relation to the cardiac

cycle. Timing of sounds is often possible through auscultation alone, but
aided by inspection and palpation as well. In most patients with normal or
slow heart rates, it is easy to identify the paired heart sounds of S1 and S2 that
mark the onset of systole and diastole. The relatively long diastolic interval
after S2 separates one pair from the next (Fig. 9-31).

S2

S1
Systole

FIGURE 9-31.

S1
Diastole

S2
Systole

Diastole (S2 to S1) lasts longer than systole (S1 to S2).

CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

383

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The relative intensity of S1 and S2 is also helpful. S1 is usually louder than S2 at
the apex; S2 is usually louder than S1 at the base.
“Inching” your stethoscope also helps clarify the timing of S1 and S2. Return to a
place on the chest, typically the base, where it is easy to identify S1 and S2. Get
their rhythm clearly in mind. Then inch your stethoscope down the left sternal
border in steps until you hear changes in the sounds.
At times, the intensities of S1 and S2 may be abnormal, or at rapid heart rates the
duration of diastole may shorten, making it difﬁcult to distinguish systole from
diastole. Palpation of the carotid artery during auscultation is an invaluable aid
to the timing of sounds and murmurs. Since the carotid upstroke always occurs
in systole immediately after S1, sounds or murmurs coinciding with the upstroke
are systolic; sounds or murmurs following the carotid upstroke are diastolic.

For example, S1 is diminished in firstdegree heart block; S2 is diminished in
aortic stenosis.

Inspection
Careful inspection of the anterior chest may reveal the location of the apical impulse
or PMI, or less commonly, the ventricular movements of a left-sided S3 or S4. Shine
a tangential light across the chest wall over the cardiac apex to make these movements more visible. Plan to further characterize these movements as you proceed
to palpation. Keep in mind the anatomic locations diagrammed in Figure 9-32.
Right 2nd
interspace—
Aortic area

Left 2nd
interspace—
Pulmonic area

Right
ventricular
area—
Left sternal
border

Epigastric
(subxiphoid)

FIGURE 9-32.

Left
ventricular
area—Apex

Palpation areas on the chest wall.

Palpation
Begin with general palpation of the chest wall. In women, keeping the right chest
draped, gently lift the breast with your left hand or ask the woman to do this to
assist you.
384

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Heaves, Lifts, Thrills; S1 and S2, S3 and S4. Using the techniques
below, palpate in the 2nd right interspace, the 2nd left interspace, along the
sternal border, and at the apex for heaves, lifts, thrills, impulses from the RV, and
the four heart sounds.
■ To palpate heaves and lifts, use your palm and/or hold your fingerpads

flat or obliquely against the chest. Heaves and lifts are sustained
impulses that rhythmically lift your fingers, usually produced by an
enlarged right or left ventricle or atrium and occasionally by ventricular
aneurysms.
■ For thrills, press the ball of your hand (the padded area of your palm near the

wrist) ﬁrmly on the chest to check for a buzzing or vibratory sensation
caused by underlying turbulent ﬂow. If present, auscultate the same area for
murmurs. Conversely, once a murmur is detected, it is easier to palpate a
thrill in the position that accentuates the murmur, such as the leaning forward position after detecting aortic regurgitation.
■ Palpate impulses from the RV in the right ventricular area, normally at the

lower left sternal border and in the subxiphoid area (see p. 375).

The presence of a thrill changes the
grading of the murmur, as described
in pp. 396.

Palpation is less useful in patients
with a thickened chest wall or
increased AP diameter.

■ To palpate S1 and S2, using ﬁrm pressure, place your right hand on the chest

wall. With your left index and middle ﬁngers, palpate the carotid upstroke
to identify S1 and S2 just before and just after the upstroke. With practice,
you will succeed in palpating S1 and S2. For S3 and S4, apply lighter pressure
at the cardiac apex to detect the presence of any extra movements.
Left Ventricular Area
The Apical Impulse or Point of Maximal Impulse. The apical impulse
represents the brief early pulsation of the left ventricle as it moves anteriorly during contraction and contacts the chest wall. In most examinations the apical
impulse is the PMI; however, pathologic conditions such as right ventricular
hypertrophy, a dilated pulmonary artery, or an aortic aneurysm may produce a
pulsation that is more prominent than the apex beat.

In dextrocardia, a rare congenital
transposition of the heart, the heart
is situated in the right chest cavity
and generates a right-sided apical
impulse. Use percussion to help
locate the heart border, the liver,
and stomach. In full situs inversus,
the heart, trilobed lung, stomach,
and spleen are on the right, and the
liver and gallbladder are on the
left.

If you cannot identify the apical impulse with the patient supine, ask the patient
to roll partly onto the left side into the left lateral decubitus position. Palpate
again, using the palmar surfaces of several ﬁngers (Fig. 9-33). If you cannot ﬁnd
the apical impulse, ask the patient to exhale fully and stop breathing for a few
seconds. When examining a woman, it may be helpful to displace the left breast
upward or laterally as necessary, or ask her to do this for you.

The apex beat is palpable in 25% to
40% of adults in the supine position
and in 50% to 73% of adults in the left
lateral decubitus position, especially
those who are thin.129,130 Obesity, a
very muscular chest wall, or an
increased AP diameter of the chest
may obscure detection.

CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

385

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

FIGURE 9-33.

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Palpate the apical impulse in the left lateral decubitus position.

Once you have found the apical impulse, make ﬁner assessments with your
ﬁngertips, and then with one ﬁnger (Fig. 9-34). With experience, you will learn
to palpate the apical impulse in most patients.

FIGURE 9-34.

Palpate the apical impulse with one ﬁnger.

Now assess the location, diameter, amplitude, and duration of the apical impulse.
You may wish to have the patient breathe out and brieﬂy stop breathing to check
your ﬁndings.

386

See Table 9-4, Variations and Abnormalities of the Ventricular Impulses,
p. 403, for how to characterize the PMI
as tapping, sustained, or diffuse.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

■ Location. Initially try to assess loca-

Pregnancy or a high left diaphragm
may shift the apical impulse upward
and to the left.

tion with the patient supine, because
the left lateral decubitus position
displaces the apical impulse to the
left. Locate two points: the interspaces, usually the 5th or possibly
the 4th, which give the vertical location; and the distance in centimeters
from the midclavicular line (or midsternal line), which gives the horizontal location (Fig. 9-35). For the
midclavicular line, use a ruler to
mark the midpoint between the sternoclavicular and acromioclavicular
joints so that other clinicians can
reproduce your ﬁndings.

Lateral displacement toward the axillary
line from ventricular dilatation is seen in
heart failure, cardiomyopathy, and ischemic heart disease; and also in thoracic
deformities and mediastinal shift.

2
3
4
5

Apical
pulse

Midsternal Midclavicular
line
line

FIGURE 9-35.
impulse (PMI).

Locate the apical

■ Diameter. Palpate the diameter of the apical impulse. In the supine patient,

it usually measures less than 2.5 cm, about the size of a quarter, and occupies
only one interspace. It may feel larger in the left lateral decubitus position.

■ Amplitude. Estimate the amplitude of the impulse. Is the PMI brisk and tap-

ping, diffuse, or sustained? These are three important descriptors in clinical
practice. Normally, the amplitude of the PMI is small and feels brisk and
tapping (Fig. 9-36). Some young adults have an increased amplitude, or
hyperkinetic impulse, especially when excited or after exercise; the duration,
however, is normal.

S2

S1
Normal

Lateral displacement from the midclavicular line makes increased left ventricular volume and a low left
ventricular EF 5 and 10 times more
likely, respectively.129

In the left lateral decubitus position, a
diffuse PMI with a diameter >3 cm signals left ventricular enlargement;131 a
diameter of >4 cm makes left ventricular overload almost 5 times more
likely.129
A hyperkinetic high-amplitude
impulse may occur in hyperthyroidism, severe anemia, pressure overload of the left ventricle from
hypertension or aortic stenosis, or
volume overload of the left ventricle
from aortic regurgitation.

S2

S1
Hyperkinetic

F I G U R E 9 - 3 6 . PMI amplitude—
normal and hyperkinetic.

■ Duration. Duration is the most useful characteristic of the apical impulse for

identifying hypertrophy of the left ventricle. To assess duration, auscultate
the heart sounds as you palpate the apical impulse, or watch the movement
of your stethoscope as you listen at the apex. Estimate the proportion of
systole occupied by the apical impulse. Normally, it lasts through the ﬁrst
two thirds of systole, or often less, but does not continue to the second heart
sound (Fig. 9-37).

CHAPTER 9

A sustained high-amplitude impulse
significantly increases the likelihood
of LVH from the pressure overload
seen in hypertension.131 If such an
impulse is displaced laterally, consider
volume overload.

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

387

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

S1

S2
Normal

S1

S2

S1

Sustained

S2
Hypokinetic

F I G U R E 9 - 3 7 . PMI duration—
normal and sustained.

F I G U R E 9 - 3 8 . Sustained
hypokinetic PMI of dilated
cardiomyopathy.

A diffuse sustained low-amplitude
(hypokinetic) impulse is seen in heart
failure and dilated cardiomyopathy.

Palpable S3 and S4. By inspection and palpation, you may detect early
and late diastolic ventricular movements that are synchronous with pathologic
third and fourth heart sounds. With the patient in the left lateral decubitus position, palpate the apical beat gently with one ﬁnger as the patient exhales and
brieﬂy stops breathing. By marking an X on the apex, you may be able to palpate
these brief diastolic outward movements.

A brief early to middiastolic impulse
represents a palpable S3; an outward
movement just before S1 signifies a
palpable S4.

Right Ventricular Area—The Left Sternal Border in the 3rd,
4th, and 5th Interspaces. With the patient supine and the head elevated
to 30°, ask the patient to exhale and brieﬂy stop breathing, then place the tips
of your curved ﬁngers in the left 3rd, 4th, and 5th interspaces to palpate for the
systolic impulse of the RV (Fig. 9-39). If there is a palpable impulse, assess its
location, amplitude, and duration. In thin individuals, you may detect a brief
systolic tap, especially when stroke volume is increased by conditions such as
anxiety.

A sustained left parasternal movement beginning at S1 points to pressure overload from pulmonary
hypertension and pulmonic stenosis or
the chronic ventricular volume overload of an atrial septal defect. A sustained movement later in systole can
be seen in mitral regurgitation.

FIGURE 9-39.

Palpate right ventricular systolic impulse.

Occasionally, the diastolic movements of right-sided S3 and S4 are palpable in the
left 4th and 5th interspaces. Time them by auscultation or palpation of the
carotid upstroke.
388

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

In patients with an increased AP diameter, ask the patient to inhale and brieﬂy
stop breathing. Palpate for the RV in the epigastric or subxiphoid area. With your
hand ﬂattened, press your index ﬁnger just under the rib cage and up toward the
left shoulder to assess any right ventricular pulsations (Fig. 9-40). The inspiratory position moves your hand well away from the pulsations of the abdominal
aorta, which might otherwise confuse your ﬁndings.

In obstructive pulmonary disease,
hyperinflation of the lungs may prevent palpation of the hypertrophied
RV in the left parasternal area. The RV
impulse is readily palpated high in the
epigastrium where heart sounds are
also more audible.

FIGURE 9-40.

Palpate in epigastric area if increased AP diameter.

Pulmonic Area—The Left 2nd Interspace. This interspace overlies
the pulmonary artery. As the patient holds expiration, inspect and palpate for
pulmonary artery pulsations and transmitted heart sounds, especially if patients
are excited or examined after exercise.

A prominent pulsation here often
accompanies dilatation or increased
flow in the pulmonary artery. A palpable
S2 points to increased pulmonary artery
pressure from pulmonary hypertension.

Aortic Area—The Right 2nd Interspace. This interspace overlies the
aortic outﬂow tract. Search for pulsations and palpable heart sounds.

A pulsation here suggests a dilated or
aneurysmal aorta. A palpable S2 can
accompany systemic hypertension.

PERCUSSION
Palpation has replaced percussion when estimating cardiac size. If you cannot palpate the apical impulse, percussion may be your only option, but has limited correlation with the cardiac borders. Starting well to the left on the chest, percuss from
resonance toward cardiac dullness in the 3rd, 4th, 5th, and, possibly, 6th interspaces.

A markedly dilated failing heart may
have a hypokinetic apical impulse displaced far to the left. A large pericardial effusion may make the impulse
undetectable.

AUSCULTATION
Auscultation of heart sounds and murmurs is a pre-eminent skill that leads
directly to important clinical diagnoses. The ACC and the AHA has deemed
cardiac auscultation as “the most widely used method of screening for valvular
heart disease.”132 Review the six auscultatory areas in Figure 9-41, with the
CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

389

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

following caveats: (1) many authorities discourage designations such as “aortic
area,” because murmurs may be loudest in other areas, and (2) these areas do not
apply to patients with cardiac dilatation or hypertrophy, anomalies of the great
vessels, or dextrocardia.

Heart sounds and murmurs that originate in the four valves radiate widely,
as illustrated in Figure 9-42. Use anatomical location rather than valve
area to describe your findings.

2nd right
interspace—
aortic area

2nd left
interspace—
pulmonic area
Aortic

Pulmonic

Tricuspid

Mitral

Apex—
mitral area
Lower left
sternal border—
tricuspid area

FIGURE 9-41.

Auscultatory areas on the chest wall.

F I G U R E 9 - 4 2 . Radiation of heart
sounds and murmurs.

Throughout your examination, take your time at each of the six auscultatory
areas. Concentrate on each of the events in the cardiac cycle, listening carefully
to S1, then S2, then other sounds and murmurs occurring in systole and diastole.
Techniques for assessing these events are described in the pages that follow.
Know Your Stethoscope!
the diaphragm and the bell.

It is important to understand the uses of both

■ The diaphragm. The diaphragm is better for picking up the relatively high-

pitched sounds of S1 and S2, the murmurs of aortic and mitral regurgitation, and pericardial friction rubs. Listen throughout the precordium with the
diaphragm, pressing it ﬁrmly against the chest.
■ The bell. The bell is more sensitive to the low-pitched sounds of S3 and S4

Many types of stethoscopes are available. Learn about the various options
before purchasing this expensive
instrument. Some are “tunable,” allowing you to vary the pressure on the
diaphragm to alter its acoustic characteristics; others are electronic and can
amplify and even digitally record auscultatory events.

and the murmur of mitral stenosis. Apply the bell lightly, with just enough
pressure to produce an air seal with its full rim. Use the bell at the apex, then
move medially along the lower sternal border. Resting the heel of your hand on
the chest like a fulcrum may help you to maintain light pressure.

Firm pressure on the bell can stretch the underlying skin and make it function
more like the diaphragm. Low-pitched sounds like S3 and S4 may then disappear—an observation that can help identify them. In contrast, high-pitched
390

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
sounds such as a midsystolic click, an ejection sound, or an OS will persist or
get louder.
The Pattern of Auscultation. In a quiet room, auscultate the heart with
your stethoscope with the patient’s head and upper chest elevated to 30°. Start
at either the base or apex, listening ﬁrst with the diaphragm, then with the bell.
■ Some experts recommend starting at the apex and moving to the base: Move the

stethoscope from the PMI medially to the left sternal border, superiorly to
the 2nd interspace, then across the sternum to the 2nd interspace at the right
sternal border, stopping at “the 6 listening spots” marked by the white circles
in Figure 9-41. To clarify ﬁndings, “inch” the stethoscope in smaller increments as needed (see p. 384).
■ Alternatively, you can start at the base and inch your stethoscope to the apex:

with your stethoscope in the right 2nd interspace close to the sternum, move
along the left sternal border in each interspace from the 2nd through the 5th,
and then toward the apex.
Two Important Maneuvers. For new patients and patients needing a complete cardiac examination, use two additional maneuvers to enhance detection
of mitral stenosis and aortic regurgitation.
■ Mitral stenosis. Ask the patient to roll into the left lateral decubitus position,

which brings the left ventricle closer to the chest wall. Place the bell of your
stethoscope lightly on the apical impulse (Fig. 9-43).
This position accentuates a left-sided
S3 and S4 and mitral murmurs, especially mitral stenosis. Otherwise, you
may miss these important findings.

F I G U R E 9 - 4 3 . Auscultate for mitral stenosis in the left lateral decubitus position.

CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

391

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Aortic regurgitation. Ask the patient to sit up, lean forward, exhale completely,

and brieﬂy stop breathing after expiration. Pressing the diaphragm of your
stethoscope on the chest, listen along the left sternal border and at the apex,
pausing periodically so the patient may breathe (Fig. 9-44).

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

You may easily miss the soft diastolic
decrescendo murmur of aortic
regurgitation unless you listen at this
position.

F I G U R E 9 - 4 4 . Auscultate for aortic regurgitation with the patient leaning forward.

Identifying Systole and Diastole. To facilitate the correct identiﬁcation
of systole and diastole, as you auscultate the chest, palpate the right carotid
artery in the lower third of the neck with your left index and middle ﬁngers—S1
falls just before the carotid upstroke and S2 follows the carotid upstroke. Be sure
to compare the intensities of S1 and S2 as you move your stethoscope through the
listening areas above.
■ At the base, you will note that S2 is louder than S1 and may split with respira-

tion. At the apex, S1 is usually louder than S2 unless the PR interval is
prolonged.
■ By carefully noting the intensities of S1 and S2, you will conﬁrm each of these

sounds and thereby correctly identify systole, the interval between S1 and S2,
and diastole, the interval between S2 and S1.
The correct timing of systole and diastole is the fundamental prerequisite to
identifying events in the cardiac cycle. Review the guides to auscultation on
next page and learn the tips for identifying heart murmurs which follow in the
next section.
392

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

Auscultatory Sounds
Heart Sounds

Guides to Auscultation

S1

Note its intensity and any apparent splitting. Normal
splitting is detectable along the lower left sternal border.

S2

Note its intensity.

Split S2

Listen for splitting of this sound in the 2nd and 3rd
left interspaces. Ask the patient to breathe quietly,
and then slightly more deeply than normal. Does S2
split into its two components, as it normally does? If
not, ask the patient to (1) breathe a little more
deeply, or (2) sit up. Listen again. A thick chest wall
may make the pulmonic component of S2 inaudible.

See Table 9-5, Variations in the First
Heart Sound—S1, p. 404. Note that S1
is louder at more rapid heart rates,
and PR intervals are shorter.
See Table 9-6, Variations in the Second
Heart Sound—S2, p. 405.
When either A2 or P2 is absent, as in
aortic or pulmonic valve disease, S2 is
persistently single.

Width of split. How wide is the split? It is normally
quite narrow.
Timing of split. When in the respiratory cycle do you
hear the split? It is normally heard late in inspiration.

Expiratory splitting suggests a valvular abnormality (p. 405).

Does the split disappear as it should, during exhalation? If not, listen again with the patient sitting up.

Persistent splitting results from
delayed closure of the pulmonic valve
or early closure of the aortic valve.

Intensity of A2 and P2. Compare the intensity of the
two components, A2 and P2; A2 is usually louder.

A loud P2 points to pulmonary
hypertension.

Extra Sounds in
Systole

Such as ejection sounds or systolic clicks
Note their location, timing, intensity, and pitch, and
variations with respiration

The systolic click of mitral valve prolapse is the most common extra
sound. See Table 9-7, Extra Heart
Sounds in Systole, p. 406.

Extra Sounds in
Diastole

Such as S3, S4, or an opening snap
Note the location, timing, intensity, and pitch, and
variations with respiration. An S3 or S4 in athletes is
a normal ﬁnding.

See Table 9-8, Extra Heart Sounds in
Diastole, p. 407.

Systolic and Diastolic
Murmurs

Murmurs are diﬀerentiated from S1, S2, and extra
sounds by their longer duration.

See Table 9-9, Midsystolic Murmurs,
pp. 408–409; Table 9-10, Pansystolic
(Holosystolic) Murmurs, p. 410; and
Table 9-11, Diastolic Murmurs,
p. 411.

Identifying Heart Murmurs. Correctly identifying heart murmurs is a
diagnostic challenge. A systematic approach, thorough understanding of cardiac
anatomy and physiology, and, above all, your dedication to the practice and
mastery of techniques of examination will lead to your success. Whenever
possible, compare your ﬁndings with those of an experienced clinician to improve
your clinical acumen. Review the tips for identifying heart murmurs, then carefully
study the subsequent sections on the timing, shape, location, radiation, intensity,
pitch, and quality of heart murmurs for more details.140 Study the tables at the
end of the chapter to further expand your skills. Reinforce your learning by
listening to heart sound recordings, which can increase accurate identiﬁcation of
heart murmurs (and generally transfers to actual patients).15,17–19,21,22
CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

393

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

Tips for Identifying Heart Murmurs
Time the murmur—is it in systole or diastole? What is its duration?
Locate where on the precordium the murmur is loudest—at the base, along
the sternal border, at the apex? Does it radiate?
● Conduct any necessary maneuvers, such as having the patient lean forward
and exhale or turn to the left lateral decubitus position.
● Determine the shape of the murmur—for example, is it crescendo or decrescendo, is it holosystolic?
● Grade the intensity of the murmur from 1 to 6, and determine its pitch and
quality.
● Identify associated features such as the quality of S and S , the presence of
1
2
extra sounds such as S3, S4, or an OS, or the presence of additional murmurs.
● Be sure you are listening in a quiet room!
●
●

Timing. First decide if you are hearing a systolic murmur, falling between S1
and S2, or a diastolic murmur, falling between S2 and S1. Palpating the carotid
pulse as you listen can help you with timing. Murmurs that coincide with the
carotid upstroke are systolic.

Systolic Murmurs
Systolic murmurs are typically midsystolic or pansystolic. Midsystolic murmurs
can be functional murmurs; these are typically short midsystolic murmurs that
decrease in intensity with maneuvers that reduce left ventricular volume, such
as standing, sitting up, and straining during the Valsalva maneuver. These murmurs are often heard in healthy patients and are not pathologic. Early systolic
murmurs are uncommon and are not depicted below.

S1

S1

S1

394

S2

S2

S2

S1

Murmurs detected during pregnancy
should be promptly evaluated for
possible risk to the mother and fetus,
especially those of aortic stenosis or
pulmonary hypertension.154

Midsystolic murmur: Begins after S1 and
stops before S2. Brief gaps are audible
between the murmur and the heart sounds.
Listen carefully for the gap just before S2,
which is more readily detected and, if present, usually conﬁrms the murmur as midsystolic, not pansystolic.

Midsystolic murmurs typically arise
from blood flow across the semilunar
(aortic and pulmonic) valves. See
Table 9-10, Pansystolic (Holosystolic)
Murmurs, p. 411.

Pansystolic (holosystolic) murmur: Starts
with S1 and stops at S2, without a gap
between murmur and heart sounds.

Pansystolic murmurs often occur with
regurgitant (backward) flow across
the AV valves. See Table 9-9, Midsystolic Murmurs, pp. 408–409.

Late systolic murmur: Usually starts in midor late systole and persists up to S2.

This is the murmur of mitral valve prolapse and is often, but not always, preceded by a systolic click (see p. 406);
the murmur of mitral regurgitation
may also be late systolic.

S1

S1

Diastolic murmurs usually represent
valvular heart disease. Systolic murmurs point to valvular disease but can
be physiologic flow murmurs arising
from normal heart valves.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

Diastolic Murmurs
Diastolic murmurs may be early diastolic, middiastolic, or late diastolic.

S1

S2

S1

Early diastolic murmur: Starts immediately
after S2, without a discernible gap, then
usually fades into silence before the next S1.

Early diastolic murmurs typically
reflect regurgitant flow across
incompetent semilunar valves.

Middiastolic murmur: Starts a short time
after S2. It may fade away, as illustrated, or
merge into a late diastolic murmur.

Middiastolic and presystolic murmurs
reflect turbulent flow across the AV
valves. See Table 9-11, Diastolic
Murmurs, p. 411.

S1

S2

S1

Late diastolic (presystolic) murmur: Starts
late in diastole and typically continues up to S1.
S1

S2

S1

Continuous Murmurs
Some congenital and clinical conditions produce continuous murmurs.
Systole

S1

Continuous murmur: Begins in systole
and extends into all or part of diastole (but
is not necessarily uniform throughout).140

Diastole

S2

S1

Congenital patent ductus arteriosus
and AV fistulas, common in dialysis
patients, produce continuous murmurs
that are nonvalvular in origin. Venous
hums and pericardial friction rubs also
have both systolic and diastolic components. See Table 9-12, Cardiovascular Sounds with Both Systolic and
Diastolic Components, p. 412.

Shape. The shape or conﬁguration of a murmur is determined by its intensity over time.

S1

S1

S2

S2

Crescendo murmur: Grows louder.

Note the presystolic murmur of mitral
stenosis in normal sinus rhythm.

Decrescendo murmur: Grows softer.

Note the early diastolic murmur of
aortic regurgitation.

S1

S1

(continued )

CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

395

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

S1

Crescendo–decrescendo murmur:
First rises in intensity, then falls.

Listen for the midsystolic murmur of
aortic stenosis and innocent flow
murmurs.

Plateau murmur: Has the same intensity
throughout.

Note the pansystolic murmur of mitral
regurgitation.

S1

S1

S2

S1

Location of Maximal Intensity. This is determined by the site where the
murmur originates. Find the location by exploring the area where you hear the
murmur. Describe where you hear it best in terms of the intercostal space and its
proximity to the sternum, the apex, or its measured distance from the midclavicular, midsternal, or one of the axillary lines.

For example, a murmur best heard in
the 2nd right interspace often originates at or near the aortic valve.

Radiation or Transmission from the Point of Maximal Intensity. This
reﬂects not only the site of origin but also the intensity of the murmur, the direction
of blood ﬂow, and bone conduction in the thorax. Explore the area around a murmur and determine where else you can hear it.

The murmur of aortic stenosis often
radiates to the neck in the direction of
arterial flow, especially on the right
side. In mitral regurgitation, the murmur often radiates to the axilla, supporting transmission by bone
conduction.141,160

Intensity. This is usually graded on a six-point scale and expressed as a
fraction. The numerator describes the intensity of the murmur wherever it is loudest; the denominator indicates the scale you are using. Intensity is inﬂuenced by
the thickness of the chest wall and the presence of intervening tissue.

An identical degree of turbulence
would cause a louder murmur in a thin
person than in a very muscular or
obese person. Emphysematous lungs
may diminish the intensity of murmurs.

Grade murmurs using the six-point scale below (the Levine grading system).161,162 Note that grades 4 through 6 require the added presence of a palpable thrill.

For maneuvers, see Special Techniques,
pp. 397–399.

Gradations of Murmurs
Grade

Description

Grade 1

Very faint, heard only after listener has “tuned in”; may not be
heard in all positions
Quiet, but heard immediately after placing the stethoscope on
the chest
Moderately loud
Loud, with palpable thrill
Very loud, with thrill. May be heard when the stethoscope is
partly oﬀ the chest
Very loud, with thrill. May be heard with stethoscope entirely
oﬀ the chest

Grade 2
Grade 3
Grade 4
Grade 5
Grade 6

396

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Pitch. This is categorized as high, medium, or low.
Quality. This is described in terms such as blowing, harsh, rumbling, and
musical.

Other useful characteristics of murmurs and heart sounds include variation with
respiration, the position of the patient, and other special maneuvers.

A fully described murmur might be: a
“medium-pitched, grade 2/6, blowing
decrescendo diastolic murmur, best
heard in the 4th left interspace, with radiation to the apex” (aortic regurgitation).
Right-sided heart murmurs generally
increase with inspiration; left-sided
murmurs generally increase with
expiration.132

Integrating Cardiovascular Assessment
Cardiovascular assessment requires more than careful examination. You need to
correctly identify and interpret individual ﬁndings, ﬁt them together in a logical pattern, and correlate your cardiac ﬁndings with the patient’s blood pressure and heart rate, carotid upstroke and JVP, the arterial pulses, the remainder
of your physical examination, and the patient’s history. Evaluating systolic murmurs illustrates this point.
Integrated Assessment: Systolic Murmurs
An asymptomatic teenager might have a grade 2/6 midsystolic murmur in the
2nd and 3rd left interspaces. Because this suggests a pulmonic murmur you
should assess the RV for hypertrophy by carefully palpating the left parasternal
area. Because pulmonic stenosis and atrial septal defects can cause this murmur,
auscultate carefully for a split S2, any ejection sounds, and variation with inspiration. Listen to the murmur after the patient sits up. Look for evidence of anemia,
hyperthyroidism, or pregnancy that could cause such a murmur by increasing the
ﬂow across the aortic or the pulmonic valve. If all your ﬁndings are normal, your
patient probably has a functional murmur—one with no pathologic signiﬁcance.
Integrating this information allows you to generate a diﬀerential diagnosis
about the origin of the murmur and pursue further evaluation.

A 60-year-old woman with angina
might have a harsh 3/6 midsystolic crescendo–decrescendo murmur in the
right 2nd interspace radiating to the
neck. These findings are consistent
with aortic stenosis but could arise
from aortic sclerosis (leaflets are sclerotic but not stenotic), a dilated aorta,
or increased flow across a normal
valve. Assess any delay in the carotid
upstroke and the intensity of A2 for evidence of aortic stenosis. Check the apical impulse for LVH. Listen for aortic
regurgitation as the patient leans forward and exhales.

Special Techniques: Maneuvers to Identify
Murmurs and Heart Failure
The maneuvers described below help distinguish mitral valve prolapse and
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy from aortic stenosis.
Standing and Squatting. When a person is standing up, venous return to the
heart decreases, as does peripheral vascular resistance. Arterial blood pressure,
stroke volume, and the volume of blood in the left ventricle all decline. With
squatting, vascular and volume changes occur in the opposite direction. These
maneuvers help (1) to identify a prolapsed mitral valve and (2) to distinguish
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy from aortic stenosis.

Secure the patient’s gown so that it will not interfere with your examination, and
prepare for prompt auscultation. Instruct the patient to squat next to the examining table and hold on to it for balance. Listen to the heart with the patient in the
squatting position and again in the standing position.
CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

397

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

Maneuvers to Identify Systolic Murmurs
Effect on Systolic Sounds and Murmurs
Maneuver

Squatting;
Valsalva:
Release
Phase
Standing;
Valsalva:
Strain
Phase

Cardiovascular Effect

μ

μ

Increased left ventricular
volume from ↑ venous
return to heart
Increased vascular
tone: ↑ arterial blood
pressure; ↑ peripheral
vascular resistance
Decreased left ventricular
volume from ↓ venous
return to heart
Decreased vascular
tone: ↓ arterial blood
pressure

Mitral Valve
Prolapse

Hypertrophic
Cardiomyopathy

Aortic Stenosis

↓ prolapse of mitral
valve

↓ outﬂow
obstruction

↑ blood volume ejected
into aorta

of click and
μ Delay
murmur shortens

↓ intensity of
murmur

↑ intensity of murmur

↑ prolapse of mitral
valve

↑ outﬂow
obstruction

↓ blood volume ejected
into aorta

Click moves earlier in
systole and murmur lengthens

↑ intensity of
murmur

↓ intensity of murmur

μ

Valsalva Maneuver. The Valsalva maneuver involves forcible exhalation
against a closed glottis after full inspiration, causing increased intrathoracic pressure. The normal systolic blood pressure response follows four phases: (1) transient increase during onset of the “strain” phase when the patient bears down,
due to increased intrathoracic pressure; (2) sharp decrease to below baseline as
the “strain” phase is maintained, due to decreased venous return; (3) further
acute drop of both blood pressure and left ventricular volume during the “release”
phase, due to decreased intrathoracic pressure; and (4) “overshoot” increased
blood pressure, due to reﬂex sympathetic activation and increased stroke volume.142,163 This maneuver has several uses at the bedside.

To distinguish the murmur of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, ask the supine patient
to “bear down, like straining during a bowel movement.” Alternatively, place one
hand on the patient’s midabdomen and ask the patient to strain against it. With
your other hand, place your stethoscope on the patient’s chest and listen at the
lower left sternal border.

The murmur of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is the only systolic murmur that
increases during the “strain phase” of
the Valsalva maneuver due to
increased outflow tract obstruction.143

The Valsalva maneuver can also identify heart failure and pulmonary hypertension. Inﬂate the blood pressure cuff to 15 mm Hg greater than the systolic
blood pressure and ask the patient to perform the Valsalva maneuver for
10 seconds, then resume normal respiration. Keep the cuff pressure locked
at 15 mm Hg above the baseline systolic pressure during the entire maneuver
and for 30 seconds afterward. Listen for Korotkoff sounds over the brachial
artery throughout. Typically, only phases 2 and 4 are signiﬁcant, since phases
1 and 3 are too short for clinical detection. In healthy patients, phase 2, the
“strain” phase, is silent; Korotkoff sounds are heard after straining is released during phase 4.

In patients with severe heart failure,
blood pressure remains elevated and
there are Korotkoff sounds during the
phase 2 strain phase, but not during
phase 4 release, termed “the square
wave” response. This response is highly
correlated with volume overload and
elevated left ventricular end-diastolic
pressure and pulmonary capillary
wedge pressure, in some studies outperforming brain natriuretic peptide.142,163

398

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
Isometric Handgrip. Isometric handgrip increases the systolic murmurs of
mitral regurgitation, pulmonic stenosis, and ventricular septal defect, and also
the diastolic murmurs of aortic regurgitation and mitral stenosis.132
Transient Arterial Occlusion. Transient compression of both arms by bilateral blood pressure cuff inﬂation to 20 mm Hg greater than peak systolic blood
pressure augments the murmurs of mitral regurgitation, aortic regurgitation, and
ventricular septal defect.132

Recording Your Findings
Note that initially you may use sentences to describe your ﬁndings; later you will
use phrases. The style below contains phrases appropriate for most write-ups.
Recording the Cardiovascular Examination
“The JVP is 3 cm above the sternal angle with the head of bed elevated to 30°.
Carotid upstrokes are brisk, without bruits. The PMI is tapping, 1 cm lateral to
the midclavicular line in the 5th intercostal space. Crisp S1 and S2. At the base, S2
is louder than S1 with physiologic split of A2 > P2. At the apex, S1 is louder than S2.
There are no murmurs or extra sounds.”
OR
“The JVP is 5 cm above the sternal angle with the head of bed elevated to 50°.
Carotid upstrokes are brisk; a bruit is heard over the left carotid artery. The PMI
is diﬀuse, 3 cm in diameter, palpated at the anterior axillary line in the 5th and
6th intercostal spaces. S1 and S2 are soft. S3 is present at the apex. High-pitched
harsh 2/6 holosystolic murmur best heard at the apex, radiating to the axilla.”

CHAPTER 9

These findings suggest heart failure
with volume overload with possible
left carotid occlusion and mitral regurgitation.104,106,114,164,165

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

399

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 9-1 Selected Heart Rates and Rhythms
Cardiac rhythms may be classiﬁed as regular or irregular. When rhythms are irregular or rates are either fast or slow, obtain an ECG
to identify the origin of the beats (sinus node, AV node, atrium, or ventricle) and the conduction pattern. The normal range for
normal sinus rhythm is reported at 50 to 90 beats/minute.42 Note that AV nodal rhythms, including AV block, may have a fast,
normal, or slow ventricular rate.

ECG Pattern

Usual Resting Rate

Sinus tachycardia

100–180

Supraventricular (atrial or nodal) tachycardia

150–250

Atrial ﬂutter with a regular ventricular response

100–175

Ventricular tachycardia

110–250

Normal sinus rhythm

60–90

Second-degree AV block

60–100

Atrial ﬂutter with a regular ventricular response

75–100

WHAT IS
THE RATE?

FAST
(>100)

OR
REGULAR

NORMAL
(60–90)
OR

IS THE RHYTHM
REGULAR OR
IRREGULAR?

SLOW
(<60)

SPORADIC
OR
IRREGULAR

REGULARLY
IRREGULAR

Sinus bradycardia

<60

Second-degree AV block

30–60

Complete heart block

<40

Premature or extra beats at random intervals, but
normal underlying rhythm: i.e., atrial or ventricular
premature contractions, sinus arrhythmia
Regular pattern of cadences: i.e., ventricular
trigeminy

OR
IRREGULARLY
IRREGULAR

No discernible regularity: i.e., atrial ﬁbrillation,
atrial ﬂutter

WHAT IS THE
PATTERN OF
IRREGULARITY?

400

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

μ

See Table 9-2

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 9-2 Selected Irregular Rhythms
Type of Rhythm

ECG Waves and Heart Sounds
Rhythm. The heart varies
cyclically, usually speeding up
with inspiration and slowing
down with expiration.
Heart Sounds. Normal, although
S1 may vary with the heart rate.

SPORADIC
Sinus Arrhythmia

S1 S2

S1 S2

S1

S2

S1 S2

S1 S2

INSPIRATION

Atrial or Nodal Premature
Contractions
(Supraventricular)

Aberrant P wave

EXPIRATION

Rhythm. A beat of atrial or nodal
origin comes earlier than the next
expected normal beat. A pause
follows, and then the rhythm
resumes.
Heart Sounds. S1 may differ in
intensity from the S1 of normal
beats, and S2 may be decreased.

Normal QRS and T

QRS
P
T

S1 S2
Early beat

SPORADIC OR REGULARLY
IRREGULAR
Ventricular Premature
Contractions
(Ventricular bigeminy or trigeminy)

No P wave

Pause

Rhythm. A beat of ventricular
origin comes earlier than the next
expected normal beat. A pause
follows, and the rhythm resumes.
Heart Sounds. S1 may differ in
intensity from the S1 of the
normal beats, and S2 may be
decreased. Both sounds are likely
to be split.

Aberrant QRS and T

S1 S2
Pause

Early beat with split sounds

IRREGULARLY IRREGULAR
Atrial Fibrillation and Atrial
Flutter with Varying AV
Block

No P waves

S1 S2

Rhythm. The ventricular rhythm
is totally irregular, although short
runs of the irregular ventricular
rhythm may seem regular.
Heart Sounds. S1 varies in
intensity.

Fibrillation waves

S1 S2

S1 S2

S1

S2

CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

401

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 9-3 Abnormalities
of the Arterial Pulse
and Pressure Waves

The pulse pressure is approximately 30–40 mm Hg. The pulse
contour is smooth and rounded. (The notch on the descending
slope of the pulse wave is not palpable.)

Normal
mm Hg

Small Weak Pulses

The pulse pressure is diminished, and the pulse feels weak and
small. The upstroke may feel slowed, the peak prolonged.
Causes include (1) decreased stroke volume, as in heart failure,
hypovolemia, and severe aortic stenosis; and (2) increased
peripheral resistance, as in exposure to cold and severe heart
failure.

Large Bounding Pulses

The pulse pressure is increased, and the pulse feels strong and
bounding. The rise and fall may feel rapid, the peak brief.
Causes include (1) increased stroke volume, decreased
peripheral resistance, or both, as in fever, anemia,
hyperthyroidism, aortic regurgitation, arteriovenous ﬁstulas,
and patent ductus arteriosus; (2) increased stroke volume
because of slow heart rates, as in bradycardia and complete
heart block; and (3) decreased compliance (increased stiffness)
of the aortic walls, as in aging or atherosclerosis.

Bisferiens Pulse

A bisferiens pulse is an increased arterial pulse with a double
systolic peak, detected during moderate compression of the
artery. Causes include pure aortic regurgitation, combined aortic
stenosis and regurgitation, and, though less commonly palpable,
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Pulsus Alternans

The pulse is completely regular, but has alternating strong and
weak beats (unlike bigeminy). If there is only a slight difference
between the strong and weak beats, detection requires use of a
blood pressure cuff (see p. 381). Pulsus alternans indicates left
ventricular failure and is usually accompanied by a left-sided S3.

Bigeminal Pulse

This disorder may mimic pulsus alternans. A bigeminal pulse is
caused by a normal beat alternating with a premature contraction.
The stroke volume of the premature beat is diminished in relation
to that of the normal beats, and the pulse varies in amplitude
accordingly.

Premature contractions

A paradoxical pulse may be detected by a palpable decrease in
the pulse amplitude on quiet inspiration. If the sign is less
pronounced, a blood pressure cuff is needed. Systolic pressure
decreases by >10–12 mm Hg during inspiration. A paradoxical
pulse occurs in pericardial tamponade, exacerbations of asthma
and COPD, and constrictive pericarditis.

Paradoxical Pulse

Expiration

402

Inspiration

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 9-4 Variations
and Abnormalities of the
Ventricular Impulses

In the healthy heart, the left ventricular impulse is usually the PMI. This brief impulse is generated by the movement of the
ventricular apex against the chest wall during contraction. The right ventricular impulse is normally not palpable beyond infancy,
and its characteristics are indeterminate. Learn the classical descriptors of the normal left ventricular PMI:
■ Location: in the 4th or 5th interspace, at the midclavicular line
■ Diameter: discrete, or ≤2 cm
■ Amplitude: brisk and tapping
■ Duration: ≤2/3 of systole
Careful examination of the ventricular impulse gives you important clues about underlying cardiovascular hemodynamics.
The characteristics of the ventricular impulse change as the left and right ventricles adapt to high-output states (anxiety,
hyperthyroidism, and severe anemia) and to the more pathologic conditions of chronic pressure or volume overload. In addition
to the normal brisk tapping PMI, learn to recognize three additional types of ventricular impulses and their distinguishing
features in the table below:
■ Hyperkinetic: The hyperkinetic ventricular impulse from transiently increased stroke volume—this change does not necessarily
indicate heart disease.
■ Sustained: The sustained ventricular impulse of ventricular hypertrophy from chronic pressure load, known as increased
afterload (see p. 387).
■ Diffuse: The diffuse ventricular impulse of ventricular dilation from chronic volume overload, or increased preload.

Left Ventricular Impulse
Hyperkinetic

Right Ventricular Impulse

Pressure
Overload

Volume
Overload

Hyperkinetic

Pressure
Overload

Volume
Overload

Examples
of Causes

Anxiety,
hyperthyroidism,
severe anemia

Aortic stenosis,
hypertension

Aortic or mitral
regurgitation;
cardiomyopathy

Anxiety,
hyperthyroidism,
severe anemia

Pulmonic
stenosis,
pulmonary
hypertension

Atrial septal
defect

Location

Normal

Normal

Displaced to the
left and possibly
downward

3rd, 4th, or 5th
left interspaces

3rd, 4th, or
5th left
interspaces,
also
subxiphoid
area

Left sternal
border,
extending
toward the left
cardiac
border, also
subxiphoid
area

Diameter

∼2 cm, though
increased
amplitude may
make diameter
feel larger

>2 cm

>2 cm

Not useful

Not useful

Not useful

Amplitude

More forceful
tapping

More forceful
tapping

Diffuse

Slightly more
forceful

More forceful

Slightly to
markedly
more forceful

Duration

<2/3 systole

Sustained (up
to S2)

Often slightly
sustained

Normal

Sustained

Normal to
slightly
sustained

CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

403

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 9-5 Variations in the First Heart Sound—S

1

S1 is softer than S2 at the base (right and left 2nd
interspaces).

Normal Variations

S1

S2

S1 is often but not always louder than S2 at the apex.

S1

S2

Accentuated S1

S1

S2

Diminished S1

S1

S2

Varying S1

S1

S2

S1

S2

Split S1

S1

404

S2

S1 is accentuated in (1) tachycardia, rhythms with a
short PR interval, and high cardiac output states (e.g.,
exercise, anemia, hyperthyroidism) and (2) mitral
stenosis. In these conditions, the mitral valve is still
open wide at the onset of ventricular systole and then
closes quickly.

S1 is diminished in ﬁrst-degree heart block, left bundle
branch block, and myocardial infarction due to weak
ventricular contraction. Early mitral valve closure
occurring before ventricular contraction also causes a
soft S1, seen in acute aortic regurgitation.

S1 varies in intensity (1) in complete heart block, when
atria and ventricles are beating independently of each
other and (2) in any totally irregular rhythm (e.g., atrial
ﬁbrillation). In these situations, the mitral valve is in
varying positions before being shut by ventricular
contraction. Its closure sound, therefore, varies in
loudness.

Delayed closure of the tricuspid valve increases splitting
of S1, best heard along the lower left sternal border
where the tricuspid component, often too faint to be
heard, becomes audible. A prominent split S1 occurs
when right ventricular contraction is delayed, as in right
bundle branch block and left premature contractions.
This split may sometimes be heard at the apex, but must
be distinguished from an S4, an aortic ejection sound,
and an early systolic click.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 9-6 Variations in the Second Heart Sound—S
Inspiration
Physiologic Splitting

A2

S1

S2

Expiration
Listen for physiologic splitting of S2 in the 2nd
or 3rd left interspace. The pulmonic
component of S2 is usually too faint to be
heard at the apex or aortic area, where S2 is a
single sound derived only from aortic valve
closure. Normal splitting is accentuated by
inspiration, which increases the interval
between A2 and P2, and disappears on
expiration. In some patients, especially
younger ones, S2 may not become single on
expiration until the patient sits up.

P2

S1

S2

Wide physiologic splitting of S2 refers to an
increase in the usual splitting of S2 during
inspiration that persists throughout the
respiratory cycle. Wide splitting is caused by
delayed closure of the pulmonic valve (as in
pulmonic stenosis or right bundle branch
block) or early closure of the aortic valve
(mitral regurgitation). Right bundle branch
block is illustrated here.

Pathologic Splitting
(Audible splitting occurs during expiration and suggests
heart disease.)
S1

S1

S2

S2

S1

S2

S1

S2

S1

Fixed splitting refers to wide splitting that
does not vary with respiration, often due to
prolonged right ventricular systole, seen in
atrial septal defect (when the pulse is
regular) and in right ventricular failure.

S2
P2

S1

2

A2

S2

Paradoxical or reversed splitting refers to
splitting that appears on expiration and
disappears on inspiration. Closure of the aortic
valve is abnormally delayed so that A2 follows
P2 in expiration. Normal inspiratory delay of
P2 makes the split disappear. The most
common cause is left bundle branch block.

A2 and P2: 2nd Right Interspace
A2 with Increased Intensity (A2 can usually be heard only in A2 Decreased or Absent: occurs in calciﬁc aortic stenosis due
right 2nd interspace): occurs in systemic hypertension because to valve immobility. If A2 is inaudible, no splitting is heard.
of the increased pressure load. Increased intensity also occurs
when the aortic root is dilated, attributed to the increased
proximity of the aortic valve to the chest wall.
P2 with Increased Intensity: When P2 is equal to or louder
than A2, suspect pulmonary hypertension. Other causes
include a dilated pulmonary artery and an atrial septal defect.
When a split S2 is heard widely, extending to the apex and the
right base, P2 is accentuated.

P2 Decreased or Absent: This usually occurs from the
increased AP diameter of the chest associated with aging. It can
also result from pulmonic stenosis. If P2 is inaudible, no
splitting is heard.

CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

405

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 9-7 Extra Heart Sounds in Systole

There are two kinds of extra heart sounds in systole: (1) early ejection sounds and (2) clicks, commonly heard in mid- and late
systole.

Early Systolic
Ejection Sounds
S1 Ej

S2

Early systolic ejection sounds occur shortly after S1, coincident with
sudden pathologic halting of the aortic and pulmonic valves as they
open in early systole.133 They are relatively high in pitch, have a
sharp clicking quality, and are best heard with the diaphragm. An
ejection sound indicates CVD.
Listen for an aortic ejection sound at both the base and apex. It may be
louder at the apex and usually does not vary with respiration. An
aortic ejection sound may accompany a dilated aorta, or aortic valve
disease from congenital stenosis or a bicuspid aortic valve.134,135
A pulmonic ejection sound is heard best in the 2nd and 3rd left
interspaces. When S1, usually relatively soft in this area, appears to
be loud, consider a possible pulmonic ejection sound. Its intensity
often decreases with inspiration. Causes include dilatation of the
pulmonary artery, pulmonary hypertension, and pulmonic stenosis.

S2

Systolic clicks are usually caused by mitral valve prolapse—an
abnormal systolic ballooning of part of the mitral valve into the left
atrium related to leaﬂet redundancy and elongation of the chordae
tendineae. The clicks are usually mid- or late systolic. Prolapse of the
mitral valve is a common cardiac condition, affecting about 2% to
3% of the general population, with equal prevalence in men and
women.136–138 Systolic clicks may also be of extracardiac or
mediastinal origin.

S2

The click is usually single, but there may be more than one, usually
at or medial to the apex, but also at the lower left sternal border. The
click is high-pitched, so best heard with the diaphragm. It is often
followed by a late systolic murmur from mitral regurgitation that
crescendos up to S2. Auscultatory ﬁndings are notably variable. Most
patients have only a click, some have only a murmur, and some have
both.

Systolic Clicks

S1

C1

Squatting
S1

C1

Standing
S1

406

C1

S2

In mitral valve prolapse, ﬁndings vary from one examination to the
next and often change with body position. Several positions are
recommended to identify the syndrome: supine, seated, squatting,
and standing. Squatting (and the Valsalva release phase) delays the click
and murmur due to increased venous return; standing (and the Valsalva
strain phase) moves them closer to S1 (see p. 398).

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 9-8 Extra Heart Sounds in Diastole
Opening
Snap
S1

S2 OS

S1

S3

S1

S2

S3

S1

The opening snap (OS) is a very early diastolic sound caused by abrupt
deceleration during the opening of a stenotic mitral valve. It is best heard
just medial to the apex and along the lower left sternal border. If loud,
an OS radiates to the apex and to the pulmonic area, where it may be
mistaken for the pulmonic component of a split S2. Its high pitch and
snapping quality help to distinguish it from an S2, but it becomes less
audible as the valve leaﬂets become more calciﬁed. It is heard better
with the diaphragm.
You will detect physiologic S3 frequently in children and young adults to
the age of 35 or 40 years, and often during the last trimester of
pregnancy. Occurring early in diastole during rapid ventricular ﬁlling, it
is later than an OS, dull and low in pitch, and heard best at the apex in
the left lateral decubitus position. The bell of the stethoscope should be
used with very light pressure.
A pathologic S3 or ventricular gallop sounds like a physiologic S3. An S3
in adults over age 40 years is usually pathologic, arising from high
left ventricular ﬁlling pressures and abrupt deceleration of inﬂow
across the mitral valve at the end of the rapid ﬁlling phase of
diastole.25,27 Causes include decreased myocardial contractility, heart
failure, and ventricular volume overload from aortic or mitral
regurgitation, and left-to-right shunts. Listen for a left-sided S3 at the
apex in the left lateral decubitus position. A right-sided S3 is usually
heard along the lower left sternal border or below the xiphoid with the
patient supine, and is louder on inspiration. The term gallop comes
from the cadence of three heart sounds, especially at rapid heart rates,
which sounds like “Kentucky.”

S4

S1

S2

S4 S1

An S4 (atrial sound or atrial gallop) occurs just before S1. It is dull, low
in pitch, and best heard at the apex with the bell. Listen at the lower
left sternal border for a right ventricular S4 (or in the subxiphoid area if
obstructive lung disease). An S4 is occasionally normal, especially in
trained athletes and older age groups. More commonly, it is due to
ventricular hypertrophy or ﬁbrosis causing stiffness and increased
resistance (or decreased compliance) during ventricular ﬁlling
following atrial contraction.26,139
Causes of a left-sided S4 include hypertensive heart disease, aortic
stenosis, and ischemic and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. A left-sided
S4 is heard best at the apex in the left lateral decubitus position, with a
cadence like “Tennessee.” The less common right-sided S4 is heard along
the lower left sternal border or below the xiphoid. It often gets louder
with inspiration. Causes include pulmonary hypertension and pulmonic
stenosis.
An S4 is also associated with delayed conduction between the atria and
ventricles. This delay separates the normally faint atrial sound from the
louder S1 and makes it audible. An S4 is never heard when there no
atrial contraction (absent during atrial ﬁbrillation).
Occasionally, a patient has both an S3 and an S4, producing a quadruple
rhythm of four heart sounds. At rapid heart rates, the S3 and S4 may
merge into one loud extra heart sound, called a summation gallop.

CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

407

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 9-9 Midsystolic Murmurs

Midsystolic ejection murmurs are the most common kind of heart murmur. They may be (1) innocent—without any detectable
physiologic or structural abnormality; (2) physiologic—from physiologic changes in body metabolism; or (3) pathologic—arising from structural abnormalities in the heart or great vessels.140–143 Midsystolic murmurs tend to peak near midsystole and usually stop before S2. The crescendo–decrescendo or “diamond” shape is not always audible, but the gap between the murmur and S2
helps to distinguish midsystolic from pansystolic murmurs.

Murmur

Innocent Murmurs

Physiologic Murmurs

S1

S1

S2

Location. Left 2nd to 4th interspaces between the
left sternal border and the apex
Radiation. Minimal

S2

Similar to innocent murmurs

Intensity. Grade 1 to 2, possibly 3
Pitch. Soft to medium
Quality. Variable
Maneuvers. Usually decreases or disappears on
sitting

Associated
Findings

None: normal splitting, no ejection sounds, no
diastolic murmurs, and no palpable evidence of
ventricular enlargement. Occasionally, both an
innocent murmur and pathologic murmur are
present.

Signs of physiologic causes (see mechanisms below)

Mechanism

Turbulent blood ﬂow, probably generated by
ventricular ejection of blood into the aorta from the
left and occasionally the right ventricle. Very
common in children and young adults, but may
also be present in older adults. There is no
underlying CVD.

Turbulence due to a temporary increase in blood
ﬂow in predisposing conditions such as anemia,
pregnancy, fever, and hyperthyroidism.

408

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Pathologic Murmurs
Aortic Stenosis135,144,145

Hypertrophic
Cardiomyopathy146

Pulmonic Stenosis147

S1

S1 E1

May be
decreased

S1

S1

A2 P2

S2

Location. Right 2nd and 3rd interspaces
Radiation. Often to the carotids, down the left sternal
border, even to the apex. If severe, may radiate to left
2nd and 3rd interspaces
Intensity. Sometimes soft, but often loud, with a thrill
(Grade 4/6 and above)
Pitch. Medium, harsh; crescendo–decrescendo may be
higher at the apex
Quality. Often harsh; may be more musical at the apex

Location. Left 3rd and 4th
interspaces
Radiation. Down the left sternal
border to the apex, possibly to the
base, but not to the neck
Intensity. Variable. See Maneuvers.
Pitch. Medium
Quality. Harsh

Location. Left 2nd and 3rd
interspaces
Radiation. If loud, toward the left
shoulder and neck
Intensity. Soft to loud; if loud,
associated with a thrill
Pitch. Medium; crescendo–
decrescendo
Quality. Often harsh

Maneuvers. Heard best with the patient sitting and leaning
forward

Maneuvers. Intensity decreases with
squatting and Valsalva release phase
(increases venous return), increases
with standing and Valsalva strain
phase (decreases left ventricular
volume) (see p. 398)

As aortic stenosis worsens, the murmur peaks later in
systole, and A2 decreases in intensity. A2 may be delayed
and merged with P2 → single S2 on expiration or a
paradoxical S2 split. Carotid upstroke may be delayed, with
a slow rise, small amplitude, and decreased volume. The
hypertrophied left ventricle may produce a sustained apical
impulse and an S4 due to decreased compliance. After age
40 years there may be a dilated aorta and murmur of aortic
regurgitation. Subendocardial ischemia due to poor
coronary perfusion distal to the valve causes angina and
syncope.

The carotid upstroke rises quickly,
unlike aortic stenosis. The apical
impulse is sustained. S2 may be
single. An S4 is usually present at
the apex (unlike mitral
regurgitation). Usually benign, but
progresses in 25% to syncope,
ischemia, atrial ﬁbrillation, dilated
cardiomyopathy and heart failure,
and stroke, with increased risk of
sudden death.

The JVP is usually normal, but
may have prominent a wave. The
right ventricular impulse is often
sustained. An early pulmonic
ejection sound is present in mild
to moderate stenosis. In severe
stenosis, S2 is widely split and P2
softens. May hear a right-sided S4
over the left sternal border.

Signiﬁcant stenosis causes turbulent blood ﬂow across the
valve, and increases left ventricular afterload. The most
common cause is valve calciﬁcation in older adults, at times
progressing from nonobstructing sclerosis (present in 25%)
to stenosis. The second most common cause is a congenital
bicuspid aortic valve, often not recognized until adulthood.

Unexplained diffuse or focal
ventricular hypertrophy with
myocyte disarray and ﬁbrosis
associated with unusually rapid
ejection of blood from the left
ventricle during systole. Outﬂow
tract obstruction of ﬂow may
coexist. Associated distortion of
the mitral valve may cause mitral
regurgitation.

Primarily a congenital disorder
with valvular, supravalvular, or
subvalvular stenosis. Stenosis
impairs ﬂow across the valve,
increasing right ventricular
afterload. In an atrial septal defect,
increased ﬂow across the
pulmonic valve may mimic
pulmonic stenosis.

CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

409

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 9-10 Pansystolic (Holosystolic) Murmurs
Pansystolic (holosystolic) murmurs are pathologic, arising from blood ﬂow from a chamber with high pressure to one of lower pressure,
through a valve or other structure that should be closed. The murmur begins immediately with S1 and continues up to S2.

Mitral
Regurgitation137,148–150

Tricuspid
Regurgitation151–153

Ventricular Septal
Defect

S1

S1

Decreased

S1

Murmur

S2

S3

Location. Apex

Radiation. To the left axilla, less
often to the left sternal border

Intensity. Soft to loud; if loud, associated with an apical thrill

S2

S3

Location. Lower left sternal border. If
right ventricular pressure is high and
the ventricle is enlarged, the murmur
may be loudest at the apex and confused with mitral regurgitation.
Radiation. To the right of the sternum, to the xiphoid area, and at
times to the left midclavicular line,
but not into the axilla.
Intensity. Variable

S2

Location. Left 3rd, 4th, and 5th
interspaces

Radiation. Often wide, depending
on the size of the defect.

Intensity. Often very loud, with a
thrill. Smaller defects have louder
murmurs.
Pitch. High, holosystolic. Smaller
defects have murmurs with a higher
pitch.
Quality. Often harsh

Pitch. Medium to high

Pitch. Medium

Quality. Harsh, holosystolic

Quality. Blowing, holosystolic

Maneuvers. Unlike tricuspid regurgitation, the intensity of the murmur does
not change with inspiration.

Maneuvers. Unlike mitral regurgitation, the intensity increases with inspiration.

Associated
Findings

S1 normal (75%), loud (12%), soft
(12%)
An apical S3 reﬂects volume overload of the left ventricle.
The apical impulse may be diffuse
and laterally displaced. There may be
a sustained lower left parasternal impulse from a dilated left atrium.

The right ventricular impulse is increased in amplitude and may be
sustained, with a “precordial rock.”
An S3 may be audible along the
lower left sternal border. The JVP is
often elevated, with large v waves in
the jugular veins, a pulsatile liver, ascites, and edema.

S2 may be obscured by the loud
murmur. Findings and associated
ﬁndings vary with the size of the
defect. Larger defects cause left-toright shunts, pulmonary hypertension, and right ventricular overload.

Mechanism

When the mitral valve fails to close
fully in systole, blood regurgitates
from left ventricle to left atrium,
causing the murmur and increasing
left ventricular preload, ultimately
leading to left ventricular dilatation.
Causes are structural, from mitral
valve prolapse, infectious endocarditis, rheumatic heart disease, and collagen vascular disease; and functional, from ventricular dilatation and
dilatation of the mitral valve annulus
and from leaﬂet, papillary muscle, or
chordae tendinae dysfunction.

When the tricuspid valve fails to close
fully in systole, blood regurgitates from
RV to right atrium, producing a murmur. The most common causes are:
right ventricular failure and dilatation,
with resulting enlargement of the tricuspid oriﬁce, often induced by pulmonary hypertension or left ventricular failure; and endocarditis—the RV
and pulmonary artery pressures are
low, so the murmur is early systolic.

A ventricular septal defect is a congenital abnormality classiﬁed according to
one of four locations in the ventricular
septum. The defect is a conduit for
bloodﬂow from the relatively high-pressure
left ventricle into the low-pressure right
ventricle. The defect may be accompanied by aortic regurgitation, tricuspid
regurgitation, and aneurysms of the
ventricular septum; an uncomplicated
lesion is described here.

410

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 9-11 Diastolic Murmurs

Diastolic murmurs are almost always pathologic. There are two basic types in adults. Early decrescendo diastolic murmurs signify
regurgitant ﬂow through an incompetent semilunar valve, usually the aortic. Rumbling diastolic murmurs in mid- or late diastole point to
stenosis of an AV valve, usually the mitral. Diastolic murmurs are less common than systolic murmurs and more difﬁcult to hear,
requiring more meticulous examination (see important Maneuvers below).

Aortic Regurgitation155–158

Mitral Stenosis153,156
Accentuated

S2

Murmur

S1

S2

S1

OS

Location. Left 2nd to 4th interspaces

Location. Usually limited to the apex

Radiation. If loud, to the apex, perhaps to the right sternal
border
Intensity. Grade 1 to 3

Radiation. Little or none

Pitch. High. Use the diaphragm.

Pitch. Decrescendo low-pitched rumble with presystolic accentuation. Use the bell.

Quality. Blowing decrescendo; may be mistaken for breath
sounds
Maneuvers. The murmur is heard best with the patient sitting,
leaning forward, with breath held after exhalation.

Intensity. Grade 1 to 4

Maneuvers. Placing the bell exactly on the apical
impulse, turning the patient into a left lateral position, and mild exercise like handgrips make the
murmur audible. It is heard better in exhalation.

Associated
Findings

With advancing severity, the diastolic pressure drops to
as low as 50 mm Hg; the pulse pressure can widen by
>80 mm Hg.
The apical impulse becomes diffuse, displaced laterally and
downward, and increased in diameter, amplitude, and duration. A systolic ejection sound may be present; S2 is increased
in aortic root dilatation and decreased if leaﬂets are thickened
and calciﬁed; and an S3 often reﬂects ventricular dysfunction
from both volume and pressure overload. A midsystolic ﬂow
murmur or a mitral diastolic (Austin Flint) murmur, usually
with middiastolic and presystolic components, reﬂect increased regurgitant ﬂow.
The arterial pulse wave collapses suddenly creating bounding
arterial pulses with pistol shot sounds on light pressure of the
diaphragm, especially with arm elevation (Corrigan pulse), a
to–fro murmur over the brachial or femoral artery with ﬁrm
pressure (Duroziez sign), and capillary pulsations with nail
blanching (Quincke pulses).

S1 is loud and may be palpable at the apex. An OS
often follows S2 and initiates the murmur. If pulmonary hypertension develops, P2 is accentuated,
the right ventricular parasternal impulse becomes
palpable, and the a wave of the JVP is more prominent. The apical impulse is small and tapping.
Atrial ﬁbrillation occurs in about a third of symptomatic patients, with ensuing risks of thromboembolism.

Mechanism

The aortic valve leaﬂets fail to close completely during diastole, causing regurgitation from the aorta back into the left
ventricle and left ventricular overload. The associated midsystolic ﬂow murmur results from the ejection of this increased stroke volume across the aortic valve. The mitral diastolic (Austin Flint) murmur is seen in moderate to severe disease and attributed to diastolic impingement of the regurgitant ﬂow on the anterior leaﬂet of the mitral valve. Causes
include leaﬂet abnormalities, aortic pathology (Marfan
syndrome), and subvalvular abnormalities such as subaortic
stenosis or an atrial septal defect.

The stiffened mitral valve leaﬂets move into the left
atrium in midsystole and narrow the valve opening, causing turbulence. The resulting murmur has
two components: (1) middiastolic (during rapid
ventricular ﬁlling) and (2) presystolic accentuation, possibly related to ventricular contraction.
The most common cause worldwide is rheumatic
fever, which causes ﬁbrosis, calciﬁcation, and
thickening of the leaﬂets and commissures, and
chordal fusion.

CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

411

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 9-12 Cardiovascular
Sounds with Both Systolic
and Diastolic Components

Some cardiovascular sounds extend beyond one phase of the cardiac cycle. Three examples, all nonvalvular in origin, are: (1) a
venous hum, a benign sound produced by turbulence of blood in the jugular veins—common in children; (2) a pericardial friction
rub, produced by inﬂammation of the pericardial sac; and (3) patent ductus arteriosus, a congenital anomaly that persists after birth
causing a left-to-right shunt from the aorta to the pulmonary artery. Continuous murmurs begin in systole and extend through S2
into all or part of diastole, as in patent ductus arteriosus. Arteriovenous ﬁstulas, common in dialysis patients, also produce
continuous murmurs.

Pericardial Friction Rub140,159

Venous Hum

Systole

S1

Ventricular
systole

Diastole

S2

S1

S1

Ventricular
diastole

Patent Ductus
Arteriosus

Atrial
systole

S2

S1

Systole

S1

Diastole

S2

Timing

Continuous murmur without a
silent interval. Loudest in diastole.

Inﬂammation of the visceral and parietal
pericardium from pericarditis produces a
coarse grating sound with one, two, or
three components (ventricular systole;
ventricular ﬁlling and atrial contraction
during diastole). Rubs are heard with
and without pericardial effusions.

Continuous murmur in
both systole and diastole,
often with a silent interval
late in diastole. Loudest in
late systole, obscures S2,
and fades in diastole.

Location

Above the medial third of the
clavicles, especially on the right,
often when the head is turned in
the opposite direction. Best heard
when patient in sitting position;
disappears when patient supine.

Usually best heard in the left 3rd
interspace next to the sternum with the
patient sitting and leaning forward with
breath held after forced expiration. (In
contrast, a pleural rub is heard only
during inspiration.) May come and go
spontaneously and require auscultation
in several positions. Causes include
myocardial infarction, uremia,
connective tissue disease.

Left 2nd interspace

Radiation

Right or left 1st and 2nd
interspaces

Minimal.

Toward the left clavicle

Intensity

Soft to moderate. The hum is
obliterated by pressure on the
internal jugular vein.

Superﬁcial sound of varying intensity
that seems “close to the stethoscope.”

Usually loud, sometimes
associated with a thrill

Quality

Humming, roaring

Scratchy, scraping, grating

Harsh, machinery-like

Pitch

Low (heard better with the bell)

High (heard better with the diaphragm)

Medium

412

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

S1

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
REFERENCES

References
1. Clark D 3rd, Ahmed MI, Dell’italia LJ, et al. An argument for
reviving the disappearing skill of cardiac auscultation. Cleve Clin
J Med. 2012;79:536.
2. Delora A. The decline of cardiac auscultation: ‘the ball of the
match point is poised on the net’. J Cardiovasc Med. 2008;9:1173.
3. Markel H. The stethoscope and the art of listening. N Engl J Med.
2006;354:551.
4. Simel DL. Time, now, to recover the fun in the physical examination rather than abandon it. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166:603.
5. Vukanovic-Criley JM, Hovanesyan A, Criley SR, et al. Conﬁdential testing of cardiac examination competency in cardiology and
noncardiology faculty and trainees: a multicenter study. Clin Cardiol. 2010;33:738.
6. Wayne DB, Butter J, Cohen ER, et al. Setting defensible standards
for cardiac auscultation skills in medical students. Acad Med.
2009;84(10 Suppl):S94.
7. Marcus G, Vessey J, Jordan MV, et al. Relationship between accurate auscultation of a clinically useful third heart sound and level
of experience. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166:617.
8. Vukanovic-Criley JM, Criley S, Warde CM, et al. Competency in
cardiac examination skills in medical students, trainees, physicians,
and faculty. A multicenter study. Arch Intern Med. 2006;166:610.
9. March SK, Bedynek JL Jr, Chizner MA. Teaching cardiac auscultation: effectiveness of a patient-centered teaching conference on
improving cardiac auscultatory skills. Mayo Clin Proc. 2005;
80;1443.
10. RuDusky BM. Auscultation and Don Quixote. Chest. 2005;127:
1869.
11. Mangione S. Cardiac auscultatory skills of physicians-in-training:
a comparison of three English-speaking countries. Am J Med.
2001;110:210.
12. Mangione S. Cardiac auscultatory skills of internal medicine and
family practice trainees. A comparison of diagnostic proﬁciency.
JAMA. 1997;278:717.
13. McKinney J, Cook DA, Wood D, et al. Simulation-based training
for cardiac auscultation skills: systematic review and meta-analysis. J Gen Intern Med. 2013;28:283.
14. McGaghie WC, Issenberg SB, Cohen ER, et al. Translational educational research: a necessity for effective health-care improvement. Chest. 2012;142:1097.
15. Norman G, Dore K, Grierson L. The minimal relationship between
simulation ﬁdelity and transfer of learning. Med Ed. 2012;46:636.
16. McGaghie WC, Issenberg SB, Cohen ER, et al. Does simulationbased medical education with deliberate practice yield better
results than traditional clinical education? A meta-analytic comparative review of the evidence. Acad Med. 2011;86:706.
17. University of Washington Department of Medicine. Introduction:
examination for heart sounds & murmurs. Advanced physical
diagnosis. Learning and teaching at the bedside. Available at
https://depts.washington.edu/physdx/heart/index.html. Accessed
June 16, 2015.
18. Butter J, McGaghie WC, Cohen ER, et al. Simulation-based mastery learning improves cardiac auscultation skills in medical students. J Gen Intern Med. 2010;25:780.
19. Michaels AD, Khan FU, Moyers B. Experienced clinicians improve
detection of third and fourth heart sounds by viewing acoustic
cardiography. Clin Cardiol. 2010;33:E36.

20. Saxena A, Barrett MJ, Patel AR, et al. Merging old school methods
with new technology to improve skills in cardiac auscultation.
Semin Med Pract. 2008;11:21.
21. Vukanovic-Criley JM, Boker JR, Criley SR, et al. Using virtual
patients to improve cardiac examination competency in medical
students. Clin Cardiol. 2008;31:334.
22. Barrett MJ, Lacey CS, Sekara AE, et al. Mastering cardiac murmurs. The power of repetition. Chest. 2004;126:470.
23. Lee E, Michaels AD, Selvester RH, et al. Frequency of diastolic
third and fourth heart sounds with myocardial ischemia induced
during percutaneous coronary intervention. J Electrocardiol.
2009;42:39.
24. Marcus GM, Gerber IL, McKeown BH, et al. Association between
phonocardiographic third and four heart sound and objective
measure of left ventricular function. JAMA. 2005;293:2238.
25. Shah SJ, Marcus GM, Gerber IL, et al. Physiology of the third heart
sound: novel insights from tissue Doppler imaging. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2008;21:394.
26. Shah SJ, Nakamura K, Marcus GM, et al. Association of the fourth
heart sound with increased left ventricular end-diastolic stiffness.
J Card Fail. 2008;14:431.
27. Shah SJ, Michaels AD. Hemodynamic correlates of the third heart
sound and systolic time intervals. Congest Heart Fail. 2006;12(4
suppl 1):8.
28. O’Rourke RA, Braunwald E. Ch 209, Physical examination of the
cardiovascular system. In Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine.
16th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2005:1307.
29. Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. 2013 AACF/AHA Guideline
for the Management of Heart Failure. J Am College Cardiol. 2013;
62:e148.
30. Vinayak AG, Levitt J, Gehlbach B, et al. Usefulness of the external
jugular vein examination in detecting abnormal central venous
pressure in critically ill patients. Arch Int Med. 2006;166:2132.
31. McConaghy JR, Oza RS. Outpatient diagnosis of acute chest pain
in adults. Am Fam Physician. 2013;87:177.
32. Mozaffarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, et al. Heart Disease and
Stroke Statistics—2016 Update: A Report From the American
Heart Association. Circulation 2016;133:e38.
33. Abrams J. Chronic stable angina. N Engl J Med. 2005;352:2524.
34. Wilson JF. In the clinic. Stable ischemic heart disease. Ann Intern
Med. 2014;160:ITC1.
35. Ashley KE, Geraci SA. Ischemic heart disease in women. South
Med J. 2013;106:427.
36. Braverman AC. Aortic dissection: prompt diagnosis and emergency treatment are critical. Cleve Clin J Med. 2011;78:685.
37. Crea F, Carnici PG, Bairey Merz CN. Coronary microvascular dysfunction: an update. Eur Heart J. 2014;35:1101.
38. Canto JG, Rogers WJ, Goldberg RJ, et al. Association of age and
sex with myocardial infarction symptom presentation and inhospital mortality. JAMA. 2012;307:813.
39. Nugent L, Mehta PK, Bairey Merz CN. Gender and microvascular
angina. J Thromb Thrombolysis. 2011;31:37.
40. Goldman L, Kirtane AJ. Triage of patient with acute chest syndrome and possible cardiac ischemia: the elusive search for diagnostic perfection. Ann Intern Med. 2003;139:987.
41. Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. American College of
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force
on Practice Guidelines; American Association for Thoracic
Surgery; American College of Radiology; American Stroke
Association; Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists; Society

CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

413

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
REFERENCES
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions; Society of
Interventional Radiology; Society of Thoracic Surgeons; Society
for Vascular Medicine. Guidelines for the management of patients
with thoracic aortic disease. Circulation. 2010;121:e266.
42. Spodick DH. Normal sinus heart rate: appropriate rate thresholds for sinus tachycardia and bradycardia. S Med J. 1996;89:
666.
43. Cho S, Atwood JE. Peripheral edema. Am J Med. 2002;113:580.
44. Clark AL, Cleland JG. Causes and treatment of oedema in patients
with heart failure. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2013;10:156.
45. Shah MG, Cho S, Atwood JE, et al. Peripheral edema due to heart
disease: diagnosis and outcome. Clin Cardiol. 2006;29:31.
46. Go AS, Mozaffarian D, Roger VL, et al. Heart disease and stroke
statistics—2014 update: a report from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2014;129:e28.
47. Yang Q, Cogswell ME, Flanders WD, et al. Trends in cardiovascular health metrics and associations with all-cause and CVD mortality among U.S. adults. JAMA. 2012;307:1273.
48. Hettema J, Steele J, Miller WR. Motivational interviewing. Annu
Rev Clin Psychol. 2005;1:91.
49. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Aspirin for the prevention of
cardiovascular disease: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2009;150:396.
50. Wolff T, Miller T, Ko S. Aspirin for the primary prevention of
cardiovascular events: an update of the evidence for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2009;150:405.
51. Goff DC Jr, Lloyd-Jones DM, Bennett G, et al. 2013 ACC/AHA
guideline on the assessment of cardiovascular risk: a report of the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task
Force on Practice Guidelines. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63(25 Pt B):
2935.
52. Mosca L, Benjamin EJ, Berra K, et al. Effectiveness-based guidelines for the prevention of cardiovascular disease in women—
2011 update: a guideline from the American Heart Association.
Circulation. 2011;123:1243.
53. Flack JM, Sica DA, Bakris G, et al. Management of high blood
pressure in Blacks: an update of the International Society on
Hypertension in Blacks consensus statement. Hypertension.
2010;56:780.
54. Meschia JF, Bushnell C, Boden-Albala B, et al. Guidelines for the
primary prevention of stroke: a statement for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/American Stroke
Association. Stroke. 2014;45:3754.
55. American Diabetes Association. Standards of medical care in diabetes—2014. Diabetes Care. 2015;38(Suppl 1):S1.
56. Greenland P, Alpert JS, Beller GA, et al. 2010 ACCF/AHA guideline for assessment of cardiovascular risk in asymptomatic adults:
executive summary: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2010;122:2748.
57. Mosca L, Mochari-Greenberger H, Dolor RJ, et al. Twelve-year
follow-up of American women’s awareness of cardiovascular disease risk and barriers to heart health. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2010;3:120.
58. Ford ES, Ajani UA, Croft JB, et al. Explaining the decrease in U.S.
deaths from coronary disease, 1980–2000. N Engl J Med.
2007;356:2388.
59. Towﬁghi A, Zheng L, Ovbiagele B. Sex-speciﬁc trends in midlife
coronary heart disease risk and prevalence. Arch Intern Med.
2009;169:1762.

414

60. Bushnell C, McCullough LD, Awad IA, et al. Guidelines for the
prevention of stroke in women: a statement for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/American Stroke
Association. Stroke. 2014;45:1545.
61. Stone NJ, Robinson JG, Lichtenstein AH, et al. 2013 ACC/AHA
guideline on the treatment of blood cholesterol to reduce atherosclerotic cardiovascular risk in adults: a report of the American
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on
Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;129:S1.
62. Piper MA, Evans CV, Burda BU, et al. Screening for high blood
pressure in adults: A systematic evidence review for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Rockville (MD); 2014. http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25632496. Accessed April 19, 2015.
63. Ritchey MD, Wall HK, Gillespie C, et al. Million hearts: prevalence of leading cardiovascular disease risk factors—United
States, 2005–2012. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2014;63:462.
64. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for high blood
pressure: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force reafﬁrmation recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2007;147:783.
65. James PA, Oparil S, Carter BL, et al. 2014 evidence-based guideline for the management of high blood pressure in adults: report
from the panel members appointed to the Eighth Joint National
Committee (JNC 8). JAMA. 2014;311:507.
66. Wright JT Jr, Fine LJ, Lackland DT, et al. Evidence supporting a
systolic blood pressure goal of less than 150 mm Hg in patients
aged 60 years or older: the minority view. Ann Intern Med. 2014;
160:499.
67. Krakoff LR, Gillespie RL, Ferdinand KC, et al. 2014 hypertension
recommendations from the eighth joint national committee panel
members raise concerns for elderly black and female populations.
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:394.
68. Weber MA, Schiffrin EL, White WB, et al. Clinical practice guidelines for the management of hypertension in the community: A
statement by the American Society of Hypertension and the International Society of Hypertension. J Clin Hypertens. 2014;16:14.
69. Chobanian AV, Bakris GL, Black HR, et al. The Seventh Report of
the Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure—The JNC 7 Report.
JAMA. 2003;289:2560–2572. Available at http://www.nhlbi.nih.
gov/health-pro/guidelines/current/hypertension-jnc-7/completereport. Accessed January 22, 2015.
70. Institute of Medicine, Committee on the Consequences of Sodium
Reduction in Populations; Food and Nutrition Board; Board on
Population Health and Public Health Practice. Strom BL, Yaktine
AL, Oria M (eds). Sodium Intake in Populations: Assessment of Evidence. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2013.
71. Rosendorff C, Lackland DT, Allison M, et al. Treatment of hypertension in patients with coronary artery disease: A scientiﬁc statement from the American Heart Association, American College of
Cardiology, and American Society of Hypertension. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;65:1998.
72. Frieden TR, Berwick DM. The “Million Hearts” initiative—preventing heart attacks and strokes. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:e27.
73. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Diabetes Statistics Report, Estimates of diabetes and its burden in the United States,
2014. Atlanta, GA: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; 2015. http://www.cdc.gov/diabetes/pubs/statsreport14/
national-diabetes report-web.pdf. Accessed April 19, 2105.
74. American Diabetes Association. Classiﬁcation and diagnosis of
diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2015;38(Suppl):S8.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
REFERENCES
75. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Final recommendation statement. Lipid disorders in adults (cholesterol, dyslipidemia):
Screening. 2014. Available at http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Document/RecommendationStatementFinal/
lipid-disorders-in-adults-cholesterol-dyslipidemia-screening.
Accessed April 19, 2015.
76. Keaney JF Jr., Curfman GD, Jarcho JA. A pragmatic view of the
new cholesterol treatment guidelines. N Engl J Med. 2014;370:275.
77. Alberti KG, Eckel RH, Grundy SM, et al. Harmonizing the metabolic syndrome: a joint interim statement of the International
Diabetes Federation Task Force on Epidemiology and Prevention;
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; American Heart Association; World Heart Federation; International Atherosclerosis
Society; and International Association for the Study of Obesity.
Circulation. 2009;120:1640.
78. Ofﬁce of the Surgeon General. The health consequences of smoking—50 years of progress. A report of the Surgeon General. Rockville, MD: Public Health Service; 2014. http://www.
surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/50-years-of-progress/fullreport.pdf. Accessed April 19, 2015.
79. Institute of Medicine of the National Academies. Leading health
indicators for Healthy People 2020. Letter Report. Washington,
DC; 2011. Available at http://www.iom.edu/∼/media/Files/
Report%20Files/2011/Leading-Health-Indicators-for HealthyPeople-2020/Leading%20Health%20Indicators%202011%20R.
Accessed April 19, 2015.
80. Norcross JC, Prochaska JO. Using the stages of change. Harv Ment
Health Lett. 2002;18:5.
81. LeFevre ML. Behavioral counseling to promote a healthful diet
and physical activity for cardiovascular disease prevention in
adults with cardiovascular risk factors: U.S. Preventive Services
Task Force Recommendation Statement. Ann Intern Med. 2014;
161:587.
82. Eckel RH, Jakicic JM, Ard JD, et al. 2013 AHA/ACC guideline on
lifestyle management to reduce cardiovascular risk: a report of the
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task
Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;129:S76.
83. Fiore MC, Jaen CR, Bakder TB. Treating tobacco use and dependence: 2008 Update. Clinical Practice Guideline. Rockville, MD:
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Public Health
Service; 2008. Available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK63952/. Accessed April 19, 2015.
84. Estruch R, Ros E, Salas-Salvado J, et al. Primary prevention of
cardiovascular disease with a Mediterranean diet. N Engl J Med.
2013;368:1279.
85. U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services. Dietary Guidelines for Americans. 7th ed.
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Ofﬁce; 2010. Available at http://www.health.gov/dietaryguidelines/dga2010/
DietaryGuidelines2010.pdf. Accessed March 30, 2015.
86. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2008 Physical
Activity Guidelines for Americans. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; 2008. Available at http://
www.health.gov/paguidelines/pdf/paguide.pdf. Accessed April
19, 2015.
87. McGee S. Evidence-based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia,
PA: Saunders; 2012.
88. The Rational Clinical Examination Series, JAMA. Available at
http://jamaevidence.mhmedical.com/book.aspx?bookID = 845.
Accessed June 12, 2015.

89. Pickering TG, Hall JE, Appel LJ, et al. Recommendations for
blood pressure measurement in humans and experimental animals: part 1: blood pressure measurement in humans: a statement
for professionals from the Subcommittee of Professional and Public Education of the American Heart Association Council on High
Blood Pressure Research. Circulation. 2005;111:697.
90. McAlister FA, Straus SE. Evidence-based treatment of hypertension. Measurement of blood pressure: an evidence based review.
BMJ. 2001;322:908.
91. Powers BJ, Olsen MK, Smith VA, et al. Measuring blood pressure
for decision making and quality reporting: where and how many
measures? Ann Intern Med. 2011;154:781.
92. Appel LJ, Miller ER 3rd, Charleston J. Improving the measurement of blood pressure: is it time for regulated standards? Ann
Intern Med. 2011;154;838.
93. Ray GM, Nawarskas JJ, Anderson JR. Blood pressure monitoring
technique impacts hypertension treatment. J Gen Intern Med.
2012;27:623.
94. Umscheid CA, Townsend RR. Is it time for a blood pressure measurement “bundle”? J Gen Intern Med. 2012;27:615.
95. Guarracino F, Ferro B, Forfori F, et al. Jugular vein distensibility
predicts ﬂuid responsiveness in septic patients. Crit Care.
2014;18:647.
96. Devine PJ, Sullenberger LE, Bellin DA, et al. Jugular venous pulse:
window into the right heart. South Med J. 2007;100:1022.
97. Drazner MH, Hellkamp AS, Leier CV, et al. Value of clinician
assessment of hemodynamics in advanced heart failure: the
ESCAPE trial. Circ Heart Fail. 2008;1:170.
98. Cook DJ, Simel DL. Does this patient have abnormal central
venous pressure? JAMA. 1996;275:630.
99. Davison R, Cannon R. Estimation of central venous pressure by
examination of jugular veins. Am Heart J. 1974;87:279.
100. Constant J. Using internal jugular pulsations as a manometer for
right atrial pressure measurements. Cardiology. 2000;93:26.
101. Meyer P, Ekundayo OJ, Adamopoulos C, et al. A propensitymatched study of elevated jugular venous pressure and outcomes
in chronic heart failure. Am J Cardiol. 2009;103:839.
102. McGee S. Ch. 34, Inspection of the neck veins. In Evidence-based
Physical Diagnosis, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:296.
103. Seth R, Magner P, Matzinger F, et al. How far is the sternal angle
from the mid-right atrium? J Gen Intern Med. 2002;17:852.
104. Hunt SA, Abraham WT, Chin MH, et al. 2009 focused update
incorporated into the ACC/AHA 2005 Guidelines for the Diagnosis and Management of Heart Failure in Adults: a report of the
American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines: developed in collaboration with the International Society for Heart and Lung
Transplantation. Circulation. 2009;119:e391.
105. Drazner MH, Prasad A, Ayers C, et al. The relationship of rightand left-sided ﬁlling pressures in patients with heart failure and a
preserved ejection fraction. Circ Heart Fail. 2010;3:202.
106. Goldberg LR. In the clinic. Heart failure. Ann Intern Med. 2010;
152:ITC 6–1.
107. Fahey T, Jeyaseelan S, McCowan C, et al. Diagnosis of left ventricular systolic dysfunction (LVSD): development and validation
of a clinical prediction rule in primary care. Fam Pract. 2007;
24:628.
108. Rame JE, Dries DL, Drazner MH. The prognostic value of the
physical examination in patients with chronic heart failure. Congest Heart Fail. 2003;9:170.

CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

415

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
REFERENCES
109. Drazner MH, Rame E, Stevenson LW, et al. Prognostic importance
of elevated jugular venous pressure and a third heart sound in
patients with heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2001;345(8):574.
110. Badgett RG, Lucey CR, Muirow CD. Can the clinical examination
diagnose left-sided heart failure in adults? JAMA. 1997;277:1712.
111. Shaheen K, Alraies MC. Superior vena cava syndrome. Cleve Clin
J Med. 2012;79:410.
112. Barst RJ, Ertel SI, Beghetti M, et al. Pulmonary arterial hypertension: a comparison between children and adults. Eur Respir J.
2011;37:665.
113. LeWinter MM. Clinical practice. Acute pericarditis. N Engl J Med.
2014;371:2410.
114. Meyer T, Shih J, Aurigemma G. In the clinic. Heart failure with
preserved ejection fraction (diastolic dysfunction). Ann Intern
Med. 2013;158:ITC 5–1.
115. Sandercock PA, Kavvadia E. The carotid bruit. Pract Neurol.
2002;2:221.
116. Ratchford EV, Jin Z, Di Tullio MR, et al. Carotid bruit for detection
of hemodynamically signiﬁcant carotid stenosis: the Northern
Manhattan Study. Neurol Res. 2009;31:748.
117. Sauve JS, Laupacis A, Feagan B, et al. Does this patient have a
clinically important carotid bruit? JAMA. 1993;270:2843.
118. Schorr R, Johnson K, Wan J, et al. The prognostic signiﬁcance of
asymptomatic carotid bruits in the elderly. J Gen Intern Med.
1998:13;86.
119. Jonas DE, Feltner C, Amick HR, et al. Screening for asymptomatic
carotid artery stenosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis for the
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2014;161:336.
120. Pickett CA, Jackson JL, Hemann BA, et al. Carotid bruits as a
prognostic indicator of cardiovascular death and myocardial
infarction: a meta-analysis. Lancet. 2008;371:1587.
121. Pickett CA, Jackson JL, Hemann BA, et al. Carotid bruits and
cerebrovascular disease risk: A meta-analysis. Stroke.
2010;41:2295.
122. de Weerd M, Greving JP, de Jong AW, et al. Prevalence of asymptomatic carotid artery stenosis according to age and sex. Stroke.
2009;40:1105.
123. Simel DL, Goldstein L. Update: carotid bruit. In: Simel DL, Rennie D, eds. The Rational Clinical Examination: Evidence-Based Clinical Diagnosis. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2009. Available at http://
jamaevidence.mhmedical.com/content.aspx?bookid=845&sectio
nid=61357496. Accessed June 12, 2015.
124. LeFevre ML. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for
asymptomatic carotid artery stenosis: U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2014;161:356.
125. de Weerd M, Greving JP, Hedblad B, et al. Prediction of asymptomatic carotid artery stenosis in the general population: identiﬁcation of high-risk groups. Stroke. 2014;45:2366.
126. Raman G, Moorthy D, Hadar N, et al. Management strategies for
asymptomatic carotid stenosis. Ann Intern Med. 2013;158:676.
127. Paraskevas K, Spence JD, Veith FJ, et al. Identifying which patients
with asymptomatic carotid stenosis could beneﬁt from intervention. Stroke. 2014;45:3720.
128. Daly C, Rodriguez HE. Carotid artery occlusive disease. Surg Clin
North Am. 2013;93:813.
129. McGee S. Ch. 36, Palpation of the heart. In: Evidence-based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:311.
130. Ehara S, Okuyama T, Shirai N. Comprehensive evaluation of the
apex beat using 64-slice computed tomography: Impact of left
ventricular mass and distance to chest wall. J Cardiol. 2010;55:256.

416

131. Logar HB, Medvescek NR, Rakovec P. Standardization of the apex
beat in the full left lateral position and its diagnostic value in
detecting left ventricular dilatation. Acta Cardiol. 2011;66:459.
132. American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task
Force on Practice Guidelines; Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists; Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions; Society of Thoracic Surgeons, et al. ACC/AHA 2006
guidelines for the management of patients with valvular heart
disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines developed in
collaboration with the Society of Cardiovascular Anesthesiologists. Circulation. 2006;114:e84.
133. McGee S. Ch. 40, Miscellaneous heart sounds. In: Evidence-based
Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:345.
134. Kari FA, Beyersdorf F, Siepe M. Pathophysiological implications of
different bicuspid aortic valve conﬁgurations. Cardiol Res Pract.
2012;2012:735829.
135. Siu SC, Silversides CK. Bicuspid aortic valve disease. J Am Coll
Cardiol. 2010;55:2789.
136. Topilsky Y, Michelena H, Bichara V, et al. Mitral valve prolapse
with mid-late systolic mitral regurgitation: pitfalls of evaluation
and clinical outcome compared with holosystolic regurgitation.
Circulation. 2012:125:1643.
137. Foster E. Mitral regurgitation due to degenerative mitral-valve
disease. N Engl J Med. 2010;363:156.
138. Hayek E, Gring CN, Grifﬁn BP. Mitral valve prolapse. Lancet.
2005;365:507.
139. McGee S. Ch. 39, The third and fourth heart sounds. In: Evidencebased Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:341.
140. Chizner MA. Cardiac auscultation: rediscovering the lost art. Curr
Probl Cardiol. 2008;33:326.
141. McGee S. Etiology and diagnosis of systolic murmurs in adults.
Am J Med. 2010;123:913.
142. Felker GM, Cuculich PS, Gheorghiade M. The Valsalva maneuver:
a bedside “biomarker” for heart failure. Am J Med. 2006;119:117.
143. Lembo NJ, Dell’Italia LJ, Crawford MH, et al. Bedside diagnosis of
systolic murmurs. N Engl J Med. 1988;318:1572.
144. Otto CM, Prendergast B. Aortic-valve stenosis—from patients at
risk to severe valve obstruction. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:744.
145. Manning WJ. Asymptomatic aortic stenosis in the elderly: a clinical review. JAMA. 2013;310:1490.
146. Ho CY. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in 2012. Circulation.
2012;125:1432.
147. Fitzgerald KP, Lim MJ. The pulmonary valve. Cardiol Clin.
2011;29:223.
148. Asgar AW, Mack MJ, Stone GW. Secondary mitral regurgitation in
heart failure: pathophysiology, prognosis, and therapeutic considerations. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;65:1231.
149. Bonow RO. Chronic mitral regurgitation and aortic regurgitation:
have indications for surgery changed? J Am coll Cardiol.
2013;61:693.
150. Enriquez-Sarano M, Akins CW, Vahanian A. Mitral regurgitation.
Lancet. 2009;373(9672):1382.
151. Irwin RB, Luckie M, Khattar RS. Tricuspid regurgitation: contemporary management of a neglected valvular lesion. Postgrad Med
J. 2010:86:648.
152. Mutlak D, Aronson D, Lessick J, et al. Functional tricuspid regurgitation in patients with pulmonary hypertension: is pulmonary
artery pressure the only determinant of regurgitation severity?
Chest. 2009;135:115.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
REFERENCES
153. McGee S. Ch. 44, Miscellaneous heart sounds. In: Evidencebased Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders;
2012:394.
154. Pessel C, Bonanno C. Valve disease in pregnancy. Semin Perinatol.
2014;348:273.
155. McGee S. Ch. 43, Aortic regurgitation. In: Evidence-based Physical
Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:379.
156. Maganti K, Rigolin VH, Sarano ME, et al. Valvular heart disease:
diagnosis and management. Mayo Clin Proc. 2010;85:483.
157. Enriquez-Serano M, Tajik AJ. Clinical practice. Aortic regurgitation. N Engl J Med. 2004:351:1539.
158. Babu AN, Kymes SM, Carpenter Fryer SM. Eponyms and the
diagnosis of aortic regurgitation: what says the evidence? Ann
Intern Med. 2003;138:736.
159. McGee S. Ch. 45, Disorders of the pericardium. In: Evidencebased Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders;
2012:400.

160. McGee S. Ch. 41, Heart murmurs: general principles. In: Evidencebased Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:354.
161. Levine SA. Notes on the gradation of the intensity of cardiac murmurs. JAMA. 1961:177:261.
162. Freeman RA, Levine SA. The clinical signiﬁcance of the systolic
murmur: a study of 1000 consecutive “non-cardiac” cases. Ann
Intern Med. 1933;6:1371.
163. Opotowsky AR, Ojeda J, Rogers F, et al. Blood pressure response
to the Valsalva maneuver. A simple bedside test to determine the
hemodynamic basis of pulmonary hypertension. Am Coll Cardiol.
2010;56:1352.
164. Cheng RK, Cox M, Neely ML, et al. Outcomes in patients with
heart failure with preserved, borderline, and reduced ejection
fraction in the Medicare population. Am Heart J. 2014;168:721.
165. Gheorghiade M, Vaduganathan M, Fonarow GC, et al. Rehospitalization for heart failure: problems and perspectives. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61:391.

CHAPTER 9

| The Cardiovascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

417

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

