http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

C H A P T E R

7

The Head and Neck
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (Vol. 7: Head, Eyes, and Ears; Vol. 8: Nose, Mouth,
and Neck)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com

Many critical structures like the sensory organs, cranial nerves (CNs), and major
blood vessels originate in the head and neck. To help students integrate this
complex anatomy and physiology with the skills of physical examination, this
chapter follows a special format. The Health History and the Health Promotion
and Counseling sections cover the “HEENT” components—Head, Eyes, Ear,
Nose, and Throat—as a unit since head and neck symptoms, as well as prevention strategies, are often interconnected. However, Anatomy and Physiology and
Techniques of Examination are grouped together in ﬁve combined sections due
to the close linkage between anatomic structures and function and techniques of
examination, especially for the examination of the eyes (Fig. 7-1).

The Health History

F I G U R E 7 - 1 . Test the complex
anatomy and physiology of vision.

Common or Concerning Symptoms
Headache
Change in vision: blurred vision, loss of vision, ﬂoaters, ﬂashing lights
● Eye pain, redness, or tearing
● Double vision (diplopia)
● Hearing loss, earache, ringing in the ears (tinnitus)
● Dizziness and vertigo
● Nosebleed (epistaxis)
● Sore throat, hoarseness
● Swollen glands
● Goiter
●
●

Many symptoms of the head and neck represent common benign processes, but
sometimes these symptoms reﬂect a serious underlying condition. Careful
attention to the interview and physical examination, with a focus on features and
CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

215

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY
ﬁndings that do not ﬁt a typical benign pattern, can often distinguish a common
condition of the head and neck from a serious underlying disease.

The Head
Headache is one of the most common symptoms in clinical practice, with a lifetime prevalence of 30% in the general population.1,2 Among types of headaches,
tension headache predominates, affecting half of all individuals during their
lifetime.3 Headaches are generally classiﬁed as primary (without an identiﬁed
underlying disease) or secondary (with an identiﬁed underlying disease). However, every headache warrants careful evaluation for life-threatening secondary
causes such as meningitis, subarachnoid hemorrhage, or mass lesion. Elicit a
full description of every headache and its seven attributes (see p. 79). Is it unilateral or bilateral? Severe with sudden onset, like a thunderclap? Steady or
throbbing? Continuous or intermittent? Is there an aura? Is the headache “typical” or is there something different?

See Tables 7-1 and 7-2 on Primary
Headaches and Secondary Headaches
and Cranial Neuralgias on pp. 267–269.

Look for important signs (“red ﬂags”) that warn of headaches needing prompt
investigation.

The International Classification of
Headache Disorders, now in its second
iteration, continues to evolve.5,7–9

Primary headaches include migraine,
tension, cluster, and chronic daily
headaches; secondary headaches arise
from underlying structural, systemic,
or infectious causes such as meningitis or subarachnoid hemorrhage and
may be life-threatening.4–6

Headache Warning Signs
Progressively frequent or severe over a 3-month period
Sudden onset like a “thunderclap” or “the worst headache of my life”
● New onset after age 50 years
● Aggravated or relieved by change in position
● Precipitated by Valsalva maneuver or exertion
● Associated symptoms of fever, night sweats, or weight loss
● Presence of cancer, HIV infection, or pregnancy
● Recent head trauma
● Change in pattern from past headaches
● Lack of a similar headache in the past
● Associated papilledema, neck stiﬀness, or focal neurologic deﬁcits
●
●

Thunderclap headaches reaching
maximal intensity over several minutes occur in 70% of patients with
subarachnoid hemorrhage, and are
often preceded by a sentinel leak
headache from a vascular leak into
the subarachnoid space.10

The three most important attributes of headache are its severity, its chronologic
pattern, and its associated symptoms. Is the headache severe and of sudden onset?
Does it intensify over several hours? Is it episodic? Or is it chronic or recurring?
Is there a recent change in its pattern? Does the headache recur at the same time
every day? What other symptoms, especially weakness or numbness in an arm
or leg?

If headache is severe and of sudden
onset, consider subarachnoid hemorrhage or meningitis.10

After your usual open-ended assessment, ask the patient to point to the area of
pain or discomfort.

Unilateral headache occurs in
migraine and cluster headaches.4,11
Tension headaches often arise in the
temporal areas; cluster headaches
may be retro-orbital.

216

Migraine and tension headaches are
episodic and tend to peak over several
hours. New and persisting, progressively severe headaches raise concerns
of tumor, abscess, or mass lesion.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY
Ask about associated symptoms such as nausea and vomiting.

Nausea and vomiting are common with
migraine, but also occur with brain
tumors and subarachnoid hemorrhage.

Is there a prodrome of unusual feelings such as euphoria, craving for food,
fatigue, or dizziness? Does the patient report an aura with neurologic symptoms,
such as change in vision, numbness, or weakness?

Approximately 60% to 70% of
patients with migraine have a symptom prodrome prior to onset. About a
third experience a visual aura, such as
spark photopsias (flashes of light),
fortifications (zig-zag arcs of light),
and scotomas (areas of visual loss
with surrounding normal vision).

Note that, due to increased risk of ischemic stroke and cardiovascular disease, the
World Health Association advises women with migraines over age 35 years and
women with migraines with aura avoid use of estrogen–progestin contraceptives.12–15
Ask if coughing, sneezing, or changing the position of the head affects the headache. If head position affects the headache, ask if leaning forward or lying down
increases the headache, or if lying down increases the headache.

Valsalva maneuvers and leaning forward may increase pain from acute
sinusitis. Valsalva and lying down may
increase pain from mass lesions due
to changing intracranial pressure.

Is there any overuse of analgesics, ergotamines, or triptans?

Medication for overuse headache may
cause headache if present ≥15 days a
month for three months and reverts
to <15 days a month when the medication is discontinued.16

Ask about family history.

Genetic inheritance is present in 30%
to 50% of patients with migraine.11,17

The Eyes
Begin with open-ended questions such as “How is your vision?” and “Have you
had any trouble with your eyes?” If the patient reports a change in vision, pursue
the related details.
■ Is vision worse during close work or at distances?

Difficulty with close work suggests
hyperopia (farsightedness) or presbyopia (aging vision), or, if with distances,
myopia (nearsightedness).

■ Is there blurred vision? If yes, is the onset sudden or gradual? If sudden and

If sudden visual loss is unilateral and
painless, consider vitreous hemorrhage from diabetes or trauma, macular degeneration, retinal detachment,
retinal vein occlusion, or central retinal
artery occlusion.

unilateral, is the visual loss painless or painful?

If painful, causes are usually in the
cornea and anterior chamber such
as corneal ulcer, uveitis, traumatic
hyphema, and acute angle closure
glaucoma.18–20 Optic neuritis from multiple sclerosis may also be painful.21
Immediate referral is warranted.22,23

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

217

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY
■ Is the visual loss bilateral (sudden bilateral visual loss is rare)? If so, is it

painful?

If bilateral and painless, consider
vascular etiologies such as giant-cell
arteritis or nonphysiologic causes. If
bilateral and painful, consider chemical or radiation exposures.

■ Is the onset of bilateral visual loss gradual?

Gradual vision loss usually arises from
cataracts or macular degeneration.

■ Location of visual loss may also be helpful. Is there blurring of the entire ﬁeld

Slow central loss occurs in nuclear cataract (p. 276) and macular degeneration24
(p. 242), peripheral loss in advanced
open-angle glaucoma (p. 270), and
one-sided loss with hemianopsia and
quadrantic defects (p. 273).

of vision or only parts of it?
■ If the visual ﬁeld defect is partial, is it central, peripheral, or on only one

side?

■ Are there specks in the vision or areas where the patient cannot see (scoto-

mas)? If so, do they move around in the visual ﬁeld with shifts in gaze or are
they ﬁxed?

■ Are there lights ﬂashing across the ﬁeld of vision? Vitreous ﬂoaters may ac-

company this symptom.

Moving specks or strands suggest vitreous floaters; fixed defects, or scotomas, suggest lesions in the retina or
visual pathways.
Flashing lights with new vitreous
floaters suggest detachment of the
vitreous body from the retina. Prompt
consultation is indicated.25

■ Does the patient wear glasses?

Ask about pain in or around the eyes, redness, and excessive tearing or watering.

A red painless eye is seen in subconjunctival hemorrhage, a red eye with a
gritty sensation in viral conjunctivitis.
A red painful eye is seen in hyphema,
episcleritis, acute angle closure glaucoma, herpes keratitis, foreign body,
fungal keratitis, and sarcoid uveitis.26,27
See Table 7-3, Red Eyes, p. 270.

Check for double vision, or diplopia. If present, ﬁnd out if the images are side by
side (horizontal diplopia) or on top of each other (vertical diplopia). Does diplopia persist with one eye closed? Which eye is affected?

Diplopia is seen in lesions in the
brainstem or cerebellum, and with
weakness or paralysis of one or more
extraocular muscles, as in horizontal
diplopia from palsy of CN III or VI, or
vertical diplopia from palsy of CN III
or IV. Diplopia in one eye, with the
other closed, suggests a problem in
the cornea or lens.

One kind of horizontal diplopia is physiologic. Hold one ﬁnger upright approximately 6 inches in front of your face, a second at arm’s length. When you focus
on either ﬁnger, the image of the other is double. A patient who notices this
phenomenon can be reassured.

218

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY

The Ears
Opening questions are “How is your hearing?” and “Have you had any trouble
with your ears?” If the patient has noticed a hearing loss, does it involve one or
both ears? Did it start suddenly or gradually? What are the associated symptoms,
if any?

Hearing loss may also be congenital,
from single gene mutations.28,29

Distinguish conductive loss, which results from problems in the external or middle ear, from sensorineural loss, resulting from problems in the inner ear, the
cochlear nerve, or its central connections in the brain. Two questions may be
helpful: Does the patient have special difﬁculty understanding people as they
talk? What happens in a noisy environment?

People with sensorineural loss have
trouble understanding speech, often
complaining that others mumble;
noisy environments make hearing
worse. In conductive loss, noisy environments may help.

Pursue symptoms associated with hearing loss, such as earache or vertigo to help
sort out likely causes. Ask about medications that might affect hearing and about
sustained exposure to loud noise.

Medications that affect hearing
include aminoglycosides, aspirin,
NSAIDs, quinine, and furosemide.

Complaints of earache, or pain in the ear, are especially common. Ask about associated fever, sore throat, cough, and concurrent upper respiratory infection; if
present, these heighten the likelihood of ear infection.

Pain occurs in the external canal in
otitis externa (inflammation of the
external ear canal) and, deeper within
the ear in otitis media (infection of the
middle ear).30 Pain in the ear may also
be referred from other structures in
the mouth, throat, or neck.

Ask about discharge from the ear, especially if associated with earache or trauma.
Wax or debris in the ear is usually normal.

Acute otitis externa and acute or chronic
otitis media with perforation usually
present with yellow-green discharge.

Tinnitus is a perceived sound that has no external stimulus—commonly, a musical ringing or a rushing or roaring noise in one or both ears. Tinnitus may accompany hearing
loss and often remains unexplained. Occasionally, popping sounds originate in the
temporomandibular joint, or sounds from the vessels in the neck may be audible.

Tinnitus is a common symptom,
increasing in frequency with age.
When associated with hearing loss
and vertigo, suspect Ménière disease.31

Vertigo is the sensation of true rotational movement of the patient or the surroundings.32 These sensations point primarily to a problem in the labyrinths of
the inner ear, peripheral lesions of CN VIII, or lesions in its central pathways or
nuclei in the brain.

See Table 7-4, Dizziness and Vertigo,
p. 271.

Complaints of dizziness and light-headedness are challenging because they are
often nonspeciﬁc and suggest a diverse set of conditions ranging from vertigo to
presyncope, weakness, unsteadiness, and disequilibrium. Clarify by asking what
the patient means by dizziness. Then ask, “Do you feel as if the room is spinning
or tilting (vertigo)? Do your symptoms get worse when you move your head?”
Then, “Do you feel as if you are going to fall or pass out (presyncope)? . . . Or do
you feel you are unsteady or losing your balance (disequilibrium)?”

See Table 7-4, Dizziness and Vertigo,
p. 271, for distinguishing symptoms
and time course.

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

219

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
THE HEALTH HISTORY

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

If there is true vertigo, distinguish peripheral from central neurologic causes (see
Chapter 17, see p. 722). Establish the time course of symptoms. Check for nausea, vomiting, double vision, and gait disturbance. Review the patient’s medications. Proceed with a careful neurologic examination focusing on presence of
nystagmus and focal neurologic signs.

Vertigo represents vestibular disease,
usually from peripheral causes in the
inner ear such as benign positional
vertigo, labyrinthitis, vestibular neuritis, and Ménière disease. Ataxia, diplopia, and dysarthria signal central
neurologic causes in the cerebellum
or brainstem such as cerebral vascular
disease or posterior fossa tumor; also
consider migraine.32 Feeling lightheaded, weak in the legs, or about to
faint points to presyncope from arrhythmia, orthostatic hypotension, or vasovagal stimulation.

The Nose and Sinuses
Rhinorrhea refers to drainage from the nose and is often associated with nasal
congestion, a sense of stufﬁness or obstruction. These symptoms are frequently
accompanied by sneezing, watery eyes, and throat discomfort, and itching in the
eyes, nose, and throat.33

Causes include viral infections, allergic
rhinitis (“hay fever”), and vasomotor
rhinitis. Itching favors an allergic
cause.

Do symptoms occur when colds are prevalent and last less than seven days? Do
they occur during the same season each year when pollens are in the air? Are
symptoms triggered by speciﬁc animal or environmental exposures? Are there
indoor environmental triggers such as dust or animals?

Seasonal onset or environmental
triggers suggest allergic rhinitis.

What remedies has the patient used? For how long? And how well do they work?

Drug-induced rhinitis occurs in excessive use of topical decongestants, or
use of cocaine.

Is nasal or sinus congestion preceded by a viral upper respiratory tract infection
(URI)? Is there purulent nasal discharge, loss of smell, tooth pain, or facial pain
made worse by bending forward, ear pressure, cough, or fever?

Acute bacterial sinusitis, now termed
rhinosinusitis, is unlikely until viral URI
symptoms persist more than 7 days;
both purulent drainage and facial pain
should be present for diagnosis (sensitivity and specificity are above 50%).34–36

Ask about drugs that may induce nasal stufﬁness.
Inquire about all medications or drugs, particularly oral contraceptives, reserpine, alcohol, and cocaine.
Is the nasal congestion only on one side?

Consider a deviated nasal septum,
nasal polyp, foreign body, Wegener
granuloma, or carcinoma.

Epistaxis is bleeding from the nasal passages. Bleeding can also originate in the
paranasal sinuses or nasopharynx. Note that bleeding from posterior nasal structures may pass into the throat instead of out through the nostrils. Ask the patient
to pinpoint the source of the bleeding. Is it from the nose, or has the patient
actually coughed up blood (hemoptysis) or vomited blood (hematemesis)? These
conditions have very different causes.

Local causes of epistaxis include
trauma (especially nose-picking),
inflammation, drying and crusting of
the nasal mucosa, tumors, and foreign
bodies.

220

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY
Is epistaxis a recurrent problem? Has there been easy bruising or bleeding elsewhere in the body?

Anticoagulants, NSAIDs, vascular malformations, and coagulopathies can
contribute to epistaxis.

The Mouth, Throat, and Neck
Sore throat or pharyngitis is a frequent complaint, usually associated with an acute
URI. However, sometimes a sore throat is the only symptom.
Centor’s clinical prediction rules for streptococcal and Fusobacterium necrophorum pharyngitis have been used in the past to help guide diagnosis and treatment of bacterial infection: fever history, tonsillar exudates, swollen tender
anterior cervical adenopathy, and absence of cough. However, the sensitivity
and speciﬁcity of these rules are less than 90%, calling their validity into question due to a high rate of unnecessary antibiotic use. Guidelines now recommend rapid antigen testing or throat culture for diagnosis and treatment.37–39
A sore tongue may result from local lesions as well as from systemic illness.

Abnormalities include aphthous ulcers
(p. 298) and the sore smooth tongue
of nutritional deficiency (p. 297).

Bleeding from the gums, especially when brushing teeth, is a common symptom.
Ask about local lesions and any tendency to bleed or bruise elsewhere.

Bleeding gums are usually caused by
gingivitis (p. 295).

Hoarseness refers to a change in voice quality, often described as husky, rough,
harsh, or lower pitched than usual. Causes range from diseases of the larynx to
extralaryngeal lesions that press on the laryngeal nerves.40 Ask the patient about
environmental allergies, acid reﬂux, smoking, alcohol use, and inhalation of
fumes or other irritants. Also ask if the patient talks a great deal at work.

If hoarseness is acute, consider voice
overuse, acute viral laryngitis, and
possible neck trauma.

Is the problem chronic, lasting more than 2 weeks? Is there prolonged tobacco
or alcohol use, cough or hemoptysis, weight loss, or unilateral throat pain?

If hoarseness lasts over 2 weeks, refer for
laryngoscopy and consider causes such
as hypothyroidism, reflux, vocal cord nodules, head and neck cancers including
thyroid masses, and neurologic disorders
like Parkinson disease, amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis, or myasthenia gravis.

Ask “Have you noticed any swollen glands or lumps in your neck?” because
patients are often more familiar with lay terms than with “lymph nodes.”

Enlarged tender lymph nodes commonly accompany pharyngitis.

Assess thyroid function and ask about any enlargement of the thyroid gland,
or goiter. To evaluate thyroid function, ask about temperature intolerance and
sweating. Opening questions include, “Do you prefer hot or cold weather?” “Do
you dress more warmly or less warmly than other people?” “What about blankets … do you use more or fewer than others at home?” “Have you noticed any
changes in the texture of your skin?” “Do you perspire more or less than others?” “Any new palpitations or change in weight?” Recall that as people grow
older, they sweat less, have less tolerance for cold, and tend to prefer warmer
environments.

With goiter, thyroid function may be
increased, decreased, or normal; see
Table 7-27, p. 299.
Intolerance to cold, weight gain, dry
skin, and slowed heart rate point to
hypothyroidism; intolerance to heat,
weight loss, moist velvety skin, and
palpitations point to hyperthyroidism. See Table 7-27, p. 299.

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

221

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Health Promotion and
Counseling: Evidence and
Recommendations
Important Topics for Health Promotion
and Counseling
Loss of vision: cataracts, macular degeneration, glaucoma
Hearing loss
● Oral health
●
●

Vision and hearing, critical senses for experiencing the world around us, are two
areas of special importance for health promotion and counseling. Oral health,
often overlooked, also merits clinical attention.
Loss of Vision. An estimated 14 million Americans aged 12 years or older
are considered visually impaired, deﬁned as having a visual acuity of ≥20/50 in the
better-seeing eye.41 Vision disorders in healthy young adults are usually refractive
errors. Older adults have more serious disorders, including cataracts, glaucoma,
and age-related macular degeneration. The prevalence of visual impairment
increases dramatically with age, rising from 5% in adults aged 40 to 49 to 26% of
adults 80 years and older.42 In older adults, visual impairment is associated with
decreased functional capacity, poor quality of life, increased risk of fall and injuries,
and loss of independent living. However, vision in ∼80% of visually impaired
Americans can be corrected.41 Because onset can be gradual, those affected may
not recognize their visual decline. Although acknowledging that numerous
treatments can improve visual acuity, in 2009, the U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force (USPSTF) found insufﬁcient evidence to recommend screening by primary
care physicians, assigning screening only a grade I recommendation.43 In contrast,
the American Academy of Ophthalmology strongly recommends a comprehensive
medical eye examination for all adults every 1 to 2 years, depending on age and
risk factors, including formal screening for visual acuity and glaucoma.44 Assessing
vision is a standard component of thorough physical examination. Ask patients
about any problems with face recognition, reading, or performing regular tasks,
and test acuity with the Snellen chart or a hand-held card. Refer patients with an
impairment of ≥20/50 or a one-line difference between the eyes. Examine the lens and
fundi to detect additional disorders.

Primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG) is a leading cause of visual impairment and
blindness in the United States, affecting over 2.5 million adults, including roughly
2% of adults older than age 40 years.45,46 Over half are unaware of having the
disease. In POAG, there is gradual loss of vision in the peripheral visual ﬁelds,
resulting from loss of retinal ganglion cell axons. Retinal examination reveals pallor and increasing size of the optic cup, which can enlarge to more than half the
diameter of the optic disc. Risk factors include age ≥65 years, African American
222

See Chapter 20, Older Adult,
pp. 955–1008.

See pp. 232–233 for testing acuity,
using the Snellen eye chart, and examination techniques.
Look for clouding of the lens (cataracts),
mottling of the macula, variations in
retinal pigmentation, subretinal hemorrhage or exudates (macular degeneration), and change in color and size of
the optic disc (glaucoma). See techniques for testing acuity and using
the Snellen eye chart on p. 232.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
ethnicity, diabetes, myopia, and ocular hypertension (intraocular pressure [IOP]
is ≥21 mm Hg). Not all people with POAG have elevated IOP, and those with
elevated IOP may not develop visual impairment. Further, diagnosis of optic disc
enlargement is variable, even among experts. Nonetheless, glaucoma can be successfully treated with medical and surgical interventions, despite possible adverse
events like eye irritation and cataracts. In 2013, the USPSTF found insufﬁcient
evidence for general glaucoma screening by primary care physicians due to the
complexities of diagnosis and treatment, giving only a grade I recommendation.46
However, the American Academy of Ophthalmology strongly recommends periodic glaucoma testing, especially for older and at-risk patients.47
Ultraviolet (UV) light can damage the eyes and cause skin cancers on the eyelids,
including basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and melanoma. In
addition, there is some evidence that UV light is associated with the development
of cataracts (the relation between UV light and glaucoma is less clear). Recommended preventive actions include use of sunscreen on the face and eyelids and
wearing sunglasses during exposure to direct sunlight.48
Hearing Loss. More than a third of adults older than 50 years—and 80% of
those 80 years and older—have hearing loss.42 However, this impairment, which
often contributes to emotional isolation and social withdrawal, is frequently
undetected. Unlike vision prerequisites for driving, there is no mandate for
widespread hearing testing, and many older adults avoid using hearing aids. The
USPSTF recommends screening adults 50 years of age and older.42 Hearing loss can
be accurately detected by a number of measures: a single-item screening test,
namely asking patients if they have difﬁculty hearing; multi-item questionnaires
such as the Hearing Handicap Inventory for the Elderly—Screening Version;49
handheld audiometers; the clinical “whisper test”; or the ﬁnger rub test.42 Aging is
the most important risk factor for hearing loss and presbycusis is the most common
age-related cause. In presbycusis, degenerating hair cells in the ear lead to gradually
progressive hearing loss, particularly for high-frequency sounds. Other risk factors
include congenital or familial hearing loss, syphilis, rubella, meningitis, diabetes,
recurring inner ear infections, exposure to ototoxic agents, frequent use of
headphones, and exposure to hazardous noise levels at work, leisure, or on the
battleﬁeld. Hearing aids can improve hearing and quality of life, but are more likely
to be adopted by those who report hearing loss than those diagnosed clinically.
Consequently, in 2012, the USPSTF concluded that the evidence for screening
adults ≥age 50 years is insufﬁcient, giving only a grade I recommendation.50
Oral Health. Clinicians should play an active role in promoting oral health:
up to 19% of children aged 2 to 19 years have untreated cavities, and about 5%
of adults aged 40 to 59 years and 25% of those older than age 60 years have no
teeth at all.51,52 Nearly 50% of adults aged 30 years and above have some form or
periodontal disease, including 8.5% with severe disease.53 Risk factors for
periodontal disease include low income, male gender, smoking, diabetes, and
poor oral hygiene. Begin by carefully examining the mouth. Inspect the oral cavity
for decayed or loose teeth, inﬂammation of the gingiva (gingivitis), and signs of
periodontal disease such as bleeding, pus, recession of the gums, and bad breath.
Inspect the mucous membranes, the palate, the oral ﬂoor, and the surfaces of the
tongue for ulcers and leukoplakia, warning signs for oral cancer and HIV disease.
CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

223

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
To improve oral health counsel patients to adopt daily hygiene measures. Use of
ﬂuoride-containing toothpastes reduces tooth decay, and brushing and ﬂossing
retard periodontal disease by removing bacterial plaques. Urge patients to seek
dental care at least annually to receive the beneﬁts of more specialized preventive
care such as scaling, planing of roots, and topical ﬂuorides.
Address diet and tobacco use. As with children, adults should avoid excessive
intake of foods high in starches and reﬁned sugars such as sucrose, which enhance
attachment and colonization of cariogenic bacteria. Urge patients to avoid use of
all tobacco products and to limit alcohol consumption to reduce risk of oral cancer.
Saliva cleanses and lubricates the mouth. Many medications reduce salivary ﬂow,
increasing risk for tooth decay, mucositis, and gum disease from xerostomia,
especially for the elderly. If medications cannot be changed, recommend drinking higher amounts of water and chewing sugarless gum. For those wearing
dentures, recommend removal and cleaning each night to reduce bacterial
plaque and risk of malodor. Regular massage of the gums relieves soreness and
pressure from dentures on the underlying soft tissue.
Oral Cancer. Over 40,000 cases of cancer of the oral cavity and oropharynx were diagnosed in 2014, and more than 8,000 deaths were caused by these
cancers.54 Tobacco and alcohol account for about 75% of oral cavity cancers.55
Sexually transmitted infection with the human papillomavirus (HPV) affecting
the tonsils, oropharynx, and base of the tongue is an increasingly important
cause of oropharyngeal cancers, accounting for 80% to 95% of cases.56 Risk for
HPV infection is associated with age (highest prevalence among those aged 30 to
34 years and 60 to 64 years), male gender, a higher number of sexual partners,
sexual behaviors (oral sex), and cigarette smoking.57 The primary screening test
for these cancers is examination of the oral cavity; a critical preventive strategy
is HPV vaccination among age-eligible patients. However, in 2014, the USPSTF
concluded that there was insufﬁcient evidence to routinely screen asymptomatic
adults (grade I recommendation).50 The American Dental Association recommends that providers be aware of potentially malignant lesions during routine
oral examinations, particularly among patients who use tobacco or consume
excessive amounts of alcohol.58

Anatomy and Physiology and
Techniques of Examination
The Head
Anatomy and Physiology. Regions of the head take their names from the
underlying bones of the skull, for example, the frontal area. Knowing this
anatomy helps to locate and describe physical ﬁndings (see Fig. 7-2).

Two paired salivary glands lie near the mandible: the parotid gland, superﬁcial to
and behind the mandible (both visible and palpable when enlarged), and the
submandibular gland, located deep to the mandible. Feel for the latter as you press
224

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Vertex of head
Parietal bone

Temporal
bone
Frontal bone

Orbit
Nasal bone

Superficial
temporal
artery

Zygomatic
bone

Occipital
bone

Maxilla

Mandible
Submandibular
duct
Submandibular
gland

Parotid
gland
Parotid
duct

FIGURE 7-2.

Mastoid process

Mastoid portion
of temporal bone

Styloid process

Anatomy of the head.

your tongue against your lower incisors. Its lobular surface can often be felt
against the tightened muscle. The openings of the parotid and submandibular
ducts are visible within the oral cavity (see p. 254).
The superﬁcial temporal artery passes upward just in front of the ear, where it is
readily palpable. In many normal people, especially thin and elderly ones, the
tortuous course of one of its branches can be traced across the forehead.
Techniques of Examination. Because abnormalities under the hair are
easily missed, ask if the patient has noticed anything wrong with the scalp or
hair. Hairpieces and wigs should be removed. Examine the following.
The Hair. Note its quantity, distribution, texture, and any pattern of loss.
You may see loose ﬂakes of dandruff.

Fine hair is seen in hyperthyroidism,
coarse hair in hypothyroidism. Tiny
white ovoid granules that adhere to
hairs may be nits (lice eggs).

The Scalp. Part the hair in several places and look for scaliness, lumps,
nevi, or other lesions.

Look for redness and scaling that may
indicate seborrheic dermatitis or psoriasis; soft lumps that may be pilar cysts
(wens); and pigmented nevi that raise
concern of melanoma. See Table 6-6,
Brown Lesions—Melanoma and Its
Mimics, pp. 200–203.

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

225

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

The Skull. Observe the general size and contour of the skull. Note any
deformities, depressions, lumps, or tenderness. Learn to recognize the irregularities in a normal skull, such as those near the suture lines between the parietal
and occipital bones.

An enlarged skull may signify hydrocephalus or Paget disease of bone.
Palpable tenderness or bony step-offs
may be present after head trauma.

The Face. Note the patient’s facial expression and contours. Observe for
asymmetry, involuntary movements, edema, and masses.

See Table 7-5, Selected Facies, p. 272.

The Skin. Observe the skin on the face and head, noting its color, pigmentation, texture, thickness, hair distribution, and any lesions.

Acne is common in adolescents.
Hirsutism (excessive facial hair)
may appear in some women with
polycystic ovary syndrome.

The Eyes
Anatomy and Physiology. Identify the
structures illustrated in Figure 7-3. Note that
the upper eyelid covers a portion of the iris but
does not normally overlay the pupil. The
opening between the eyelids is called the
palpebral ﬁssure. The white sclera may look
somewhat buff-colored at its periphery. Do not
mistake this color for jaundice, which is a
deeper yellow.

Upper eyelid
Sclera covered
by conjunctiva

Lateral canthus

Lower eyelid

The conjunctiva is a clear mucous membrane
with two easily visible components. The bulbar
conjunctiva covers most of the anterior eyeball,
adhering loosely to the underlying tissue. It
meets the cornea at the limbus. The palpebral
conjunctiva lines the eyelids. The two parts of
the conjunctiva merge in a folded recess that
permits movement of the eyeball.
Within the eyelids lie ﬁrm strips of connective
tissue called tarsal plates (Fig. 7-4). Each plate
contains a parallel row of meibomian glands,
which open on the lid margin. The levator palpebrae, the muscle that raises the upper eyelid,
is innervated by the oculomotor nerve, CN III.
Smooth muscle, innervated by the sympathetic nervous system, also contributes to lid
elevation.

Iris

Limbus

Pupil Medial canthus

F I G U R E 7 - 3 . Anatomy of the eye.
Levator palpebrae

Tarsal
plate
Meibomian
gland
Cornea

Bulbar
conjunctiva
Palpebral
conjunctiva

Sclera
Eyelash
Limbus

F I G U R E 7 - 4 . Sagittal section of the anterior eye.

226

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
A ﬁlm of tear ﬂuid protects the conjunctiva and
cornea from drying, inhibits microbial growth,
and gives a smooth optical surface to the cornea. This ﬂuid comes from the meibomian
glands, conjunctival glands, and lacrimal
gland. The lacrimal gland lies mostly within the
bony orbit, superior and lateral to the eyeball
(Fig. 7-5). The tear ﬂuid spreads across the eye
and drains medially through two tiny holes
called lacrimal puncta. The tears then pass into
the lacrimal sac and on into the nose through
the nasolacrimal duct. You can easily ﬁnd a
punctum atop the small elevation of the medial
lower lid medially. The lacrimal sac rests in a
small depression inside the bony orbit and is
not visible.
The eyeball is a spherical structure that focuses
light on the neurosensory elements within the
retina. The muscles of the iris control pupillary
size. Muscles of the ciliary body control the
thickness of the lens, allowing the eye to focus
on near or distant objects.
A clear liquid called aqueous humor ﬁlls the
anterior and posterior chambers of the eye.
Aqueous humor is produced by the ciliary body,
circulates from the posterior chamber through
the pupil into the anterior chamber, and drains
out through the canal of Schlemm. This circulatory system helps to control the pressure inside
the eye (Fig. 7-6).

Lacrimal gland
(within the bony orbit)

Lacrimal sac
(within the bony orbit)

Canaliculi

Puncta

Nasolacrimal
duct

F I G U R E 7 - 5 . Lacrimal gland, sac, and duct.

Ciliary body
Anterior chamber
filled with aqueous
humor

Lens
Cornea
Iris

Posterior chamber

Canal of Schlemm

F I G U R E 7 - 6 . Circulation of aqueous humor.

The posterior portion of the eye that is seen through the ophthalmoscope is often
called the optic fundus (Fig. 7-7). Structures here include the retina, choroid,
fovea, macula, optic disc, and retinal vessels. The optic nerve with its retinal vessels enters the eyeball posteriorly, visible with an ophthalmoscope at the optic
disc. Lateral and slightly inferior to the disc, there is a small depression in the
retinal surface that marks the point of central vision. Around it is a darkened
circular area called the fovea. The roughly circular macula surrounds the fovea,
but has no discernible margins. You do not usually see the normal vitreous body,
CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

227

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Vitreous body
Choroid

Optic
disc

Retina
Fovea

Iris

Central retinal
artery and vein

Vein
Artery

Optic
nerve
Pupil

Macula

Extraocular
muscle

Physiologic cup
in optic disc

Fovea

Sclera

Physiologic
cup

F I G U R E 7 - 7 . Cross-section of right eye showing the fundus as seen with an
ophthalmoscope.

a transparent mass of gelatinous material that ﬁlls the eyeball behind the lens and
helps to maintain the shape of the eye.
Visual Fields. A visual ﬁeld is the
entire area seen by an eye when it looks at
a central point. Fields are conventionally
diagrammed on circles from the patient’s
point of view. The center of the circle represents the focus of gaze. The circumference is 90° from the line of gaze. Each
visual ﬁeld, shown by the white areas in
Figure 7-8, is divided into quadrants.
Note that the ﬁelds extend farthest on the
temporal sides. Visual ﬁelds are normally
limited by the brows above, the cheeks
below, and the nose medially. A lack of
retinal receptors at the optic disc produces
an oval blind spot in the normal ﬁeld of
each eye, 15° temporal to the line of gaze.

Blind spot

90°
Blind spot

Upper
temporal

Upper
nasal

Lower
temporal

Lower
nasal
Normal visual
field

F I G U R E 7 - 8 . Visual ﬁeld of left and right eyes.

Binocular vision

When a person is using both eyes, the two
visual ﬁelds overlap in an area of binocular vision. Laterally, vision is monocular
(Fig. 7-9).
Monocular vision

F I G U R E 7 - 9 . Binocular ﬁeld created by overlapping monocular ﬁelds.

228

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Visual Pathways. To see an image, light reﬂected from the target must
pass through the pupil and be focused on photoreceptors in the retina. The
image projected there is upside down and reversed right to left (Fig. 7-10). An
image from the upper nasal visual ﬁeld thus strikes the lower temporal quadrant
of the retina.

Image on retina
Blind spot

A

Fovea

O
Center of gaze

A

Optic nerve

Object seen

F I G U R E 7 - 1 0 . Light pathway into the eye.

Nerve impulses, stimulated by light, are
conducted through the retina, optic
nerve (CN II), and optic tract on each
side, then on through a curving tract
called the optic radiation. This ends in
the visual cortex, a part of the occipital
lobe.

Light
To iris
(consensual
reaction)

To iris
(direct reaction)

Pupillary Reactions. Pupillary size
changes in response to light and to the
effort of focusing on a near object.
The Light Reaction. A light beam
shining onto one retina causes pupillary
constriction in both that eye, termed the
direct reaction to light, and in the contralateral eye, the consensual reaction to
light. The initial sensory pathways are
similar to those described for vision:
retina, optic nerve (CN II), and optic
tract, which diverges in the midbrain.
Impulses back to the constrictor muscles of the iris of each eye are transmitted through the oculomotor nerve,
CN III (Fig. 7-11).

Optic nerve

Key:
Blue––Sensory
Red––Motor

Oculomotor nerve

Optic tract

To visual cortex
F I G U R E 7 - 1 1 . Pathways of the light reaction.

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

229

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The Near Reaction. In the near reaction,
when a person shifts gaze from a far object to
a near object, the pupils constrict (Fig. 7-12).
This response, like the light reaction, is
mediated by the oculomotor nerve (CN
III). Coincident with this pupillary constriction, but not part of it, are (1) convergence of the eyes, a medial rectus
movement; and (2) accommodation, an
increased convexity of the lenses caused
by contraction of the ciliary muscles. In
accommodation the change in shape of
the lenses brings near objects into focus,
but is not visible to the examiner.

F I G U R E 7 - 1 2 . The pupils constrict when the focus shifts to a
close object.

Autonomic Nerve Supply to the Eyes.
Fibers travelling in the oculomotor nerve (CN III)
and producing pupillary constriction are part of the
parasympathetic nervous system. The iris is also
supplied by sympathetic ﬁbers. When these are
stimulated, the pupil dilates, and the upper eyelid
rises a little, as if from fear. The sympathetic pathway starts in the hypothalamus and passes down
through the brainstem and cervical cord into the
neck. From there, it follows the carotid artery or its
branches into the orbit. A lesion anywhere along this
pathway may impair sympathetic effects that dilate
the pupil (Fig. 7-13).

Temporal

Nasal

Nasal

Temporal
Visual
Fields

Left Eye

Right Eye

Optic nerve

Optic chiasm
Optic tract

Autonomic Stimulation
Parasympathetics: Pupillary constriction
● Sympathetics: Pupillary dilation and raising of
upper eyelid (superior tarsal muscle)
●

Optic
radiation

Visual
cortex

F I G U R E 7 - 1 3 . Visual pathways from retina to visual cortex.

230

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Extraocular Movements. The coordinated action of six muscles, the
four rectus and two oblique, control the eye. You can test the function of each
muscle and its CN innervation by asking the patient to move the eye in the
direction controlled by that muscle. There are six such cardinal directions, indicated by the lines in Figure 7-14. When a person looks down and to the right,
for example, the right inferior rectus (CN III) is principally responsible for moving the right eye, whereas the left superior oblique (CN IV) is principally responsible for moving the left eye. If one of these muscles is paralyzed, the eye will
deviate from its normal position in that direction of gaze and the eyes will no
longer appear conjugate, or parallel.

Superior
rectus (III)

Inferior
oblique (III)

Superior
rectus (III)

Lateral
rectus
(VI)

Medial
rectus (III)

Lateral
rectus
(VI)

Superior
oblique (IV)

Inferior
rectus (III)

Inferior
rectus (III)

F I G U R E 7 - 1 4 . Cardinal directions of gaze.

CN IV (trochlear nerve) damage, due to
head trauma, congenital causes, or
central lesions, causes dysfunction of
the superior oblique muscle, leading
to diplopia (double vision).

Techniques of Examination

Important Areas of Examination
Visual acuity
Visual ﬁelds
● Conjunctiva and sclera
● Cornea, lens, and pupils
● Extraocular movements
● Fundi, including: Optic disc and cup, retina, and retinal vessels
●
●

Visual Acuity. To test the acuity of central vision, use a well-lit Snellen eye
chart, if possible. Position the patient 20 feet from the chart. Patients who wear
glasses other than for reading should put them on. Ask the patient to cover one
eye with a card (to prevent looking through the ﬁngers) and to read the smallest
line of print possible. Coaxing to attempt the next line may improve performance. A patient who cannot read the largest letter should be positioned closer
to the chart; note the intervening distance. Identify the smallest line of print
where the patient can identify more than half the letters. Record the visual acuity
designated at the side of this line, along with use of glasses, if any. Visual acuity
is expressed as two numbers (e.g., 20/30): the ﬁrst indicates the distance of the
patient from the chart, and the second, the distance at which a normal eye can
read the line of letters.59

Vision of 20/200 means that at 20 feet the
patient can read print that a person with
normal vision could read at 200 feet. The
larger the second number, the worse
the vision. “20/40 corrected” means the
patient could read the 20/40 line with
glasses (a correction).
Myopia (nearsightedness) causes
focusing problems for distance vision.

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

231

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Testing near vision with a hand-held card can help identify the need for reading
glasses or bifocals in patients older than 45 years. You can also use this card to
test visual acuity at the bedside. Held 14 inches from the patient’s eyes, the card
simulates a Snellen chart.

Presbyopia causes focusing problems
for near vision, found in middle-aged
and older adults. A presbyopic person
often sees better when the card is
farther away.

If you have no charts, screen visual acuity with any available print. If patients
cannot read even the largest letters, test their ability to count your upraised ﬁngers and distinguish light (such as your ﬂashlight) from dark.

In the United States, a person is usually considered legally blind when
vision in the better eye, corrected by
glasses, is 20/200 or less. Legal blindness also results from a constricted
field of vision: 20° or less in the better
eye.

Visual Fields by Confrontation. Confrontation testing of the visual
ﬁelds is a valuable screening technique for detection of lesions in the anterior
and posterior visual pathway. Recent studies recommend combining two tests
to achieve the best results: the static ﬁnger wiggle test and the kinetic red target
test.60,61 Sensitivity and speciﬁcity of the two tests, when performed rigorously, compared to automated perimetry, is 78% and 90%; diagnostic accuracy improves with higher density and severity of ﬁeld defects, irrespective of
diagnosis.60 Nevertheless, even relatively dense quadrantic or hemianopic
visual ﬁeld defects can be missed by confrontation screening tests. A formalized automated perimetry test such as the Humphrey visual ﬁeld performed
by an ophthalmologist is needed to make a deﬁnitive diagnosis of a visual ﬁeld
defect.

Refer patients with suspected visual
field defects for ophthalmology evaluation. Causes of anterior pathway
defects include glaucoma, optic neuropathy, optic neuritis, and glioma.
Posterior pathway defects include
stroke and chiasmal tumors.62

Static Finger Wiggle Test.

Position yourself about an
arm’s length away from the
patient. Close one eye and
have the patient cover the
opposite eye while staring
at your open eye. So, for
example, when the patient
covers the left eye, to test
the visual field of the
patient’s right eye you
should cover your right
eye to mimic the patent’s
ﬁeld of view. Place your
hands about 2 feet apart
out of the patient’s view,
roughly lateral to the
patient’s ears (Fig. 7-15).

232

F I G U R E 7 - 1 5 . Static ﬁnger wiggle test.

F I G U R E 7 - 1 6 . Visual ﬁeld defects.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
While in this position, wiggle your ﬁngers and slowly bring your moving ﬁngers
forward into the patient’s center of view. Ask the patient to tell you as soon as
he or she sees your ﬁnger movement. Test each clock hour, or at least each
quadrant. Test each eye individually and record the extent of visits in each area.
Note any abnormal “ﬁeld cuts” (Figs. 7-16 and 7-17).

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Review these patterns in Table 7-6,
Visual Field Defects, p. 273.
As an example, when the patient’s left
eye repeatedly does not see your fingers until they have crossed the line
of gaze, a left homonymous hemianopsia is present. It is diagrammed from
the patient’s viewpoint.

Covered

LEFT

RIGHT

LEFT

RIGHT

F I G U R E 7 - 1 7 . A left homonymous
hemianopsia may be established.

Kinetic Red Target Test. Facing the patient, move a 5-mm red-topped pin
inward from beyond the boundary of each quadrant along a line bisecting the
horizontal and vertical meridians. Ask the patient when the pin ﬁrst appears to
be red.

An enlarged blind spot occurs in conditions affecting the optic nerve such
as glaucoma, optic neuritis, and papilledema.23

Position and Alignment of the Eyes. Stand in front of the patient and
survey the eyes for position and alignment. If one or both eyes seem to protrude,
assess them from above (see p. 264).

Abnormalities include esotropia
(inward deviation) or exotropia (outward deviation) of the eyes and also
abnormal protrusion in Graves disease
or ocular tumors.

Eyebrows. Inspect the eyebrows, noting their fullness, hair distribution,
and any scaliness of the underlying skin.

Scaliness occurs in seborrheic dermatitis,
lateral sparseness in hypothyroidism.

Eyelids. Note the position of the lids in relation to the eyeballs. Inspect for
the following:

See Table 7-7, Variations and Abnormalities of the Eyelids, p. 274.

■ Width of the palpebral ﬁssures

Upslanting palpebral fissures are
noted in Down syndrome.

■ Edema of the lids
■ Color of the lids

Red inflamed lid margins occur in
blepharitis, often with crusting.

■ Lesions
■ Condition and direction of the eyelashes

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

233

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
■ Adequacy of eyelid closure. Look for this especially when the eyes are unusu-

ally prominent, when there is facial paralysis, or when the patient is unconscious.

Failure of the eyelids to close exposes
the corneas to serious damage.

Lacrimal Apparatus. Brieﬂy inspect the regions of the lacrimal gland and
lacrimal sac for swelling.

See Table 7-8, Lumps and Swellings in
and Around the Eyes, p. 275.

Look for excessive tearing or dryness of the eyes. Assessment of dryness may
require special testing by an ophthalmologist. To test for nasolacrimal duct
obstruction, see p. 264.

Excessive tearing may be from
increased production, caused by conjunctival inflammation or corneal irritation, or impaired drainage, caused
by ectropion (p. 274) and nasolacrimal
duct obstruction. Dryness from
impaired secretion is seen in Sjögren
syndrome.

Conjunctiva and Sclera. Ask
the patient to look up as you depress
both lower lids with your thumbs,
exposing the sclera and conjunctiva
(Figs. 7-18 and 7-19). Inspect the
sclera and palpebral conjunctiva for
color. Note the vascular pattern
against the white scleral background.
The slight vascularity of the sclera in
Figures 7-18 and 7-20 is normal and
present in most people.

Look for any nodules or swelling
(Fig. 7-21).

F I G U R E 7 - 1 8 . Inspect the sclera
and conjunctiva.

F I G U R E 7 - 1 9 . A yellow sclera
indicates jaundice.

If you need a fuller view of the eye,
rest your thumb and ﬁnger on the
bones of the cheek and brow, respectively, and spread the lids (Fig. 7-20).
Ask the patient to look to each side
and down. This technique gives you
a good view of the sclera and bulbar
conjunctiva, but not of the palpebral
conjunctiva of the upper lid. For
this, you need to evert the lid (see
pp. 264–265).
F I G U R E 7 - 2 1 . Local redness is
from nodular episcleritis.

F I G U R E 7 - 2 0 . Obtain a fuller view
of the eye.

234

For comparisons, see Table 7-3, Red
Eyes, p. 270.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Cornea and Lens. With oblique lighting, inspect the cornea of each eye
for opacities. Note any opacities in the lens that may be visible through the pupil.

See Table 7-9, Opacities of the Cornea
and Lens, p. 276.

Iris. At the same time, inspect each iris. The markings should be clearly
deﬁned. With your light shining directly from the temporal side, look for a crescentic shadow on the medial side of the iris (Fig. 7-22). Because the iris is normally fairly ﬂat and forms a relatively open angle with the cornea, this lighting
casts no shadow.
Occasionally, the iris bows abnormally
far forward, forming a very narrow
angle with the cornea. The light then
casts a crescentic shadow as shown
here.

Light

This narrow angle increases the risk
for acute narrow-angle glaucoma a
sudden increase in IOP when drainage
of the aqueous humor is blocked
(see left upper diagram).

Light

F I G U R E 7 - 2 2 . Light each eye from the side for inspection.

Pupils. In a dim light, inspect the size, shape, and symmetry of both pupils.
Measure the pupils with a card showing black circles of varying sizes, shown
below, and test the light reaction. Note if the pupils are large (>5 mm), small
(<3 mm), or unequal (Fig. 7-23).

1

2

3

4

5

6

In open-angle glaucoma, the common
form of glaucoma, the normal spatial
relation between iris and cornea is
preserved and the iris is fully lit.

Miosis refers to constriction of the
pupils, mydriasis to dilation.

7 mm

F I G U R E 7 - 2 3 . Pupillary sizes.

Simple anisocoria, or a difference in pupillary diameter of 0.4 mm or greater without
a known pathologic cause, is visible in approximately 35% of healthy people, and
rarely exceeds 1 mm.63 Simple anisocoria is considered benign if it is equal in dim
and bright light, and there is brisk pupillary constriction to light (the light reaction).

Compare benign anisocoria with Horner
syndrome, oculomotor nerve paralysis,
and tonic pupil. See Table 7-10, Pupillary
Abnormalities, p. 277.

In dim light, test the pupillary reaction to light. Ask the
patient to look into the distance, and shine a bright light obliquely into each
pupil in turn. Both the distant gaze and the oblique lighting help to prevent a
near reaction. Look for:
The Light Reaction.

■ The direct reaction (pupillary constriction in the same eye)
■ The consensual reaction (pupillary constriction in the opposite eye)

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

235

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Always darken the room and use a bright light before deciding that a light reaction is abnormal or absent.
The Near Reaction. If the reaction to light is impaired or questionable, test the

near reaction in both dim and normal light. Testing one eye at a time makes it
easier to concentrate on pupillary responses, without the distraction of EOM.
Hold your ﬁnger or pencil about 10 cm from the patient’s eye. Ask the patient to
look alternately at it and into the distance directly behind it. Watch for pupillary
constriction with near effort and convergence of the eyes. The third component
of the near reaction, accommodation of the lens that brings the near object into
focus, is not visible.

Testing the near reaction is helpful in
diagnosing Argyll Robertson and tonic
(Adie) pupils (see p. 277).

Compare the normal light reaction and near reaction of benign anisocoria with
the constriction abnormalities of tonic pupil and oculomotor nerve (CN III) paralysis and the dilatation abnormalities of Horner syndrome and Argyll Robertson
pupils.

See Table 7-10, Pupillary Abnormalities, p. 277.

Extraocular Muscles. Standing about 2 feet directly in front of the
patient, shine a light into the patient’s eyes and ask the patient to look at it.
Inspect the light reﬂection in the corneas. They should be visible slightly nasal to the
center of the pupils (Fig. 7-24).

Asymmetry of the corneal reflections
indicates a deviation from normal
ocular alignment. A temporal light
reflection on one cornea, for example,
indicates a nasal deviation of that eye.

F I G U R E 7 - 2 4 . Inspect light reﬂection in the corneas.

A cover–uncover test may reveal a slight or latent muscle imbalance not otherwise
seen; this is particularly useful in examining children (see p. 278).
Now assess the EOMs, looking for:
■ The normal conjugate movements of the eyes in each direction. Note any devi-

ation from normal, or dysconjugate gaze.
■ Nystagmus, a ﬁne rhythmic oscillation of the eyes. A few beats of nystagmus

on extreme lateral gaze are normal. If you see this, bring your ﬁnger in to
within the ﬁeld of binocular vision and look again.

■ Lid lag as the eyes move from up to down.

236

See Table 7-11, Dysconjugate Gaze,
p. 278.
Sustained nystagmus within the binocular field of gaze is seen in congenital disorders, labyrinthitis, cerebellar
disorders, and drug toxicity. See
Table 17-7, Nystagmus, pp. 785–786.
In the lid lag of hyperthyroidism, a rim
of sclera is visible above the iris with
downward gaze.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

LOOKING RIGHT
1

4

2

5

3

6

LOOKING LEFT

F I G U R E 7 - 2 5 . Test extraocular movements.

F I G U R E 7 - 2 6 . CN VI paralysis.

Test the Six EOMs. Ask the patient to follow your ﬁnger or pencil as you sweep
through the six cardinal directions of gaze. Making a wide H in the air, lead the
patient’s gaze (Fig. 7-25):

In paralysis of the left CN VI, illustrated
above, the eyes are conjugate in right
lateral gaze but not in left lateral gaze.

1. to the patient’s extreme right,
2. to the right and upward, and
3. down on the right; then
4. without pausing in the middle, to the extreme left,
5. to the left and upward, and
6. down on the left.
Pause during upward and lateral gaze to detect nystagmus. Move your ﬁnger or pencil at a comfortable distance from the patient. Because middle-aged or older
adults may have difﬁculty focusing on near objects,
increase this distance. Some patients move their heads
to follow your ﬁnger. If necessary, hold the head in the
proper midline position.
If you suspect lid lag or hyperthyroidism, ask the patient
to follow your ﬁnger again as you move it slowly from
up to down in the midline. The upper eyelid should
overlap the iris slightly throughout this movement as
shown in Figure 7-27. Figure 7-28 shows proptosis.

F I G U R E 7 - 2 7 . Normal
upper lid overlap.

F I G U R E 7 - 2 8 . Visible rim
of sclera caused by proptosis.

Note the rim of sclera from proptosis,
an abnormal protrusion of the eyeballs in hyperthyroidism, leading to a
characteristic “stare” on frontal gaze. If
unilateral, consider an orbital tumor or
retrobulbar hemorrhage from trauma.

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

237

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Finally, if the near reaction has not already been tested, test for convergence. Ask
the patient to follow your ﬁnger or pencil as you move it in toward the bridge of
the nose. The converging eyes normally follow the object to within 5 cm to 8 cm
of the nose (Fig. 7-29).

Convergence is poor in hyperthyroidism.

F I G U R E 7 - 2 9 . Test for convergence.

Ophthalmoscopic Examination. In general health care, examine your patients’ eyes without
dilating their pupils, which can
obscure important neurologic ﬁndings. Therefore, your view is limited
to the posterior structures of the retina. To see more peripheral structures, to evaluate the macula well, or
to investigate unexplained visual loss,
consider referral to ophthalmologists
for pupillary dilatation with mydriatic drops.

Aperture
Indicator of
diopters
Lens disc

Contraindications for mydriatic drops
include (1) head injury and coma,
since continuing observations of
pupillary reactions are essential, and
(2) any suspicion of narrow-angle
glaucoma.

This section describes how to use the
traditional ophthalmoscope (Fig. F I G U R E 7 - 3 0 . Parts of the
7-30). Of note, some medical ofﬁces ophthalmoscope.
now use a PanOptic ophthalmoscope.
The PanOptic ophthalmoscope allows clinicians to view the retina, even when
the pupils are undilated. It provides a ﬁve-fold greater view of the fundus than
the traditional ophthalmoscope, enables a 25° ﬁeld of view, and increases the
examining distance between the patient and the clinician. Since most clinical
settings still use the traditional ophthalmoscope, emphasized here.
Using the ophthalmoscope to visualize the fundus is one of the most challenging
skills of physical examination, and one of the most critical when assessing headache and changes in mental status. With feedback and dedicated practice of
proper technique, the fundus, optic disc, and retinal vessels will come into focus.
Remove your glasses unless you have marked nearsightedness or severe astigmatism, or your refractive error makes it difﬁcult to see the fundi.
Review the components of the ophthalmoscope pictured above and follow the
steps for using the ophthalmoscope. With commitment and repetition, your
examination skills will improve over time.
238

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Steps for Using the Ophthalmoscope
Darken the room. Switch on the ophthalmoscope light and turn the lens disc
until you see the large round beam of white light.* Shine the light on the back
of your hand to check the type of light, its desired brightness, and the electrical charge of the ophthalmoscope.
● Turn the lens disc to the 0 diopter. (A diopter is a unit that measures the
power of a lens to converge or diverge light.) At this diopter, the lens neither
converges nor diverges light. Keep your ﬁnger on the edge of the lens disc so
that you can turn the disc to focus the lens when you examine the fundus.
● Hold the ophthalmoscope in your right hand and use your right eye to examine the patient’s right eye; hold it in your left hand and use your left eye to
examine the patient’s left eye. This keeps you from bumping the patient’s
nose and gives you more mobility and closer range for visualizing the fundus.
With practice, you will become accustomed to using your nondominant eye.
● Hold the ophthalmoscope ﬁrmly braced against the medial aspect of your bony
orbit, with the handle tilted laterally at about 20° slant from the vertical. Check
to make sure you can see clearly through the aperture. Instruct the patient to
look slightly up and over your shoulder at a point directly ahead on the wall.
● Place yourself about 15 inches away from the patient and at an angle 15° lateral to the patient’s line of vision. Shine the light beam on the pupil and look
for the orange glow in the pupil—the red reﬂex. Note any opacities interrupting the red reﬂex.
●

Examiner at 15-degree angle from patient’s line of vision, eliciting red reﬂex.
●

Now place the thumb of your other hand across the patient’s eyebrow, which
steadies your examining hand. Keeping the light beam focused on the red
reﬂex, move in with the ophthalmoscope on the 15° angle toward the pupil
until you are very close to it, almost touching the patient’s eyelashes and the
thumb of your other hand.
● Try to keep both eyes open and relaxed, as if gazing into the distance, to help
minimize any ﬂuctuating blurriness as your eyes attempt to accommodate.
● You may need to lower the brightness of the light beam to make the examination more comfortable for the patient, avoid hippus (spasm of the pupil),
and improve your observations.

Absence of a red reflex suggests an
opacity of the lens (cataract) or, possibly, the vitreous (or even an artificial
eye). Less commonly, a detached retina or, in children, a retinoblastoma
may obscure this reflex.

*Some clinicians like to use the large round beam for large pupils, and the small round beam for small
pupils. The other beams are rarely helpful. The slitlike beam is sometimes used to assess elevations or
concavities in the retina, the green (or red-free) beam to detect small red lesions, and the grid to make
measurements. Ignore the last three lights and practice with the large or small round white beam.

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

239

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Now you are ready to inspect the optic disc and the retina. The optic disc is a
round, yellow-orange to creamy pink structure with a pink neuroretinal rim and
central depression that often takes practice to locate. The ophthalmoscope magniﬁes the normal disc and retina about 15 times and the normal iris about 4
times. The optic disc actually measures about 1.5 mm. Follow the next steps for
this important segment of the physical examination.

When the lens has been removed surgically, its magnifying effect is lost.
Retinal structures then look much
smaller than usual, and you can see a
much larger expanse of the fundus.

Steps for Examining the Optic Disc
and the Retina
The Optic Disc
●

First, locate the optic disc. Look for the round yellowish-orange structure
described above, or follow a blood vessel centrally until it enters the disc. The
vessel size will help you. The vessel size becomes progressively larger at each
branch point as you approach the disc.
Artery
Vein
Physiologic cup

Optic disc

The optic disc and fundus.

Now, bring the optic disc into sharp focus by adjusting the lens of your ophthalmoscope. If both you and the patient have no refractive errors, the retina
should be in focus at 0 diopters.
● If structures are blurred, rotate the lens disc until you ﬁnd the sharpest
focus.
For example, if the patient is myopic (nearsighted), rotate the lens disc
counterclockwise to the minus diopters; in a hyperopic (farsighted) patient,
move the disc clockwise to the plus diopters. You can correct your own
refractive error in the same way.
● Inspect the optic disc. Note the following features:
● The sharpness or clarity of the disc outline. The nasal portion of the disc margin may be somewhat blurred, a normal ﬁnding.
● The color of the disc, normally yellowish orange to creamy pink. White or
pigmented crescents may ring the disc, a normal ﬁnding.
● The size of the central physiologic cup, if present. It is usually yellowish white.
The horizontal diameter is usually less than half the horizontal
diameter of the disc.
● The comparative symmetry of the eyes and ﬁndings in the fundi.
●

In a refractive error, light rays from a
distance do not focus on the retina.
In myopia, they focus anterior to the
retina, in hyperopia, posterior to it.
Retinal structures in a myopic eye
look larger than normal.

See Table 7-12, Normal Variations of
the Optic Disc, p. 279, and Table 7-13,
Abnormalities of the Optic Disc, p. 280.

An enlarged cup suggests chronic
open-angle glaucoma.

(continued )

240

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

Steps for Examining the Optic Disc
and the Retina (continued )
The Importance of Detecting Papilledema

Swelling of the optic disc and anterior bulging of the physiologic cup suggest
papilledema (Fig. 7-31), which is associated with increased intracranial pressure.
This pressure is transmitted to the optic nerve, causing stasis of axoplasmic ﬂow,
intra-axonal edema, and swelling of the optic nerve head. Papilledema signals
serious disorders of the brain, such as meningitis, subarachnoid hemorrhage,
trauma, and mass lesions, so searching for this important disorder is a priority during all your funduscopic examinations (see technique as described on prior page).
Inspect the fundus for spontaneous venous pulsations (SVPs), rhythmic variations in the caliber of the retinal veins as they cross the fundus (narrower in
systole; wider in diastole), present in 90% of normal patients.
The Retina—Arteries, Veins, Fovea, and Macula
●

Inspect the retina, including arteries and veins as they extend to the periphery,
arteriovenous crossings, the fovea, and the macula. Distinguish arteries from
veins based on the features listed below.

Color
Size
Light reﬂex (reﬂection)
●

Arteries
Light red
Smaller (2/3 to 3/4 the
diameter of veins)
Bright

Follow the vessels peripherally in each direction, noting their relative sizes and the character of the arteriovenous crossings.
Identify any lesions of the surrounding
retina and note their size, shape, color, and
distribution. As you search the retina, move
your head and instrument as a unit, using
the patient’s pupil as an imaginary fulcrum.
At ﬁrst, you may lose your view of the retina
because your light falls out of the pupil, but
you will improve with practice.
Lesions of the retina can be measured in
terms of “disc diameters” from the optic
disc.

F I G U R E 7 - 3 1 . Papilledema.

Loss of SVPs occurs with high intracranial pressures (above 190 mm H2O)
that change the pressure gradient
between cerebral spinal fluid pressure
and intraocular pulse pressure in the
optic disc. Other causes include glaucoma and retinal vein occlusion.64,65

Veins
Dark red
Larger
Inconspicuous or absent
4

1

5

2

See Tables 7-14 to 7-18 for information on retinal arteries and AV crossings, spots and streaks in the fundi,
normal and hypertensive retinopathy,
diabetic retinopathy, and lightcolored spots in the fundi.

3

Sequence of inspection from
disc to macula (left eye).

F I G U R E 7 - 3 2 . Cotton-wool patches.

(continued )

Note the irregular patches, seen in
diabetic and hypertensive retinopathy,
between 11 and 12 o’clock, 1 to 2 disc
diameters from the disc. Each measures
about ½ by ½ disc diameters.

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

241

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

Steps for Examining the Optic Disc
and the Retina (continued )
●

Inspect the fovea and surrounding macula. Direct your light beam laterally or
ask the patient to look directly into the light. In younger people, the tiny
bright reﬂection at the center of the fovea helps to orient you; shimmering
light reﬂections in the macular area are common.
Macula

Light
reflection

Macular degeneration is an important
cause of poor central vision in older
adults. Types include dry atrophic
(more common but less severe) and
wet exudative, or neovascular. Cellular
debris, called drusen, may be hard and
sharply defined, as seen in Figure 7-33,
or soft and confluent with altered pigmentation (see p. 285).

Fovea
Optic disc

F I G U R E 7 - 3 3 . Hard drusen.
(Photo from Tasman W, Jaeger E (eds). The Wills Eye
Hospital Atlas of Clinical Ophthalmology, 2nd ed.
Philadelphia, Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2001.)

Structures of the left fundus.
●

Inspect the anterior structures. Look for opacities in the vitreous or lens. Rotate
the lens disc progressively to diopters of around +10 or +12, so you can focus
on the more anterior structures in the eye.

Vitreous floaters are dark specks or
strands seen between the fundus and
the lens. Cataracts are densities in the
lens (see p. 276).

The Ear
Anatomy and Physiology. The ear has three
compartments: the external ear, the middle ear, and the
inner ear.
The External Ear. The external ear comprises the
auricle and ear canal. The auricle consists chieﬂy of cartilage
covered by skin and has a ﬁrm elastic consistency. Its prominent curved outer ridge is the helix. Parallel and anterior to
the helix is another curved prominence, the antihelix. Inferiorly is the ﬂeshy projection of the earlobe, or lobule. The ear
canal opens behind the tragus, a nodular protrusion that
points backward over the entrance to the canal (Fig. 7-34).

The ear canal curves inward and is approximately 24 mm
long. Cartilage encases its outer two thirds. In this segment,
the skin is hairy and contains glands that produce cerumen
(wax). The inner third of the canal is surrounded by bone
242

Helix
Antihelix
Tragus
Entrance
to ear
canal
Lobule

F I G U R E 7 - 3 4 . Anatomy of the external ear.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
and lined by thin, hairless skin. Pressure on this latter area causes pain—a point
to remember when you when you examine the ear. At the end of the ear canal
lies the lateral tympanic membrane, or eardrum, marking the medial limit of the
external ear. The external ear captures sound waves for transmission into the
middle and inner ear (Fig. 7-35).
Ossicles
Incus
Malleus

Stapes

Auricle

Semicircular
canals
Cochlear
nerve (CN VIII)

Ear canal

Cochlea

Cartilage

Eustachian tube
Tympanic
membrane
Mastoid process

Middle ear cavity

Bone

F I G U R E 7 - 3 5 . Anatomy of middle and inner ear.

Behind and below the ear canal is the mastoid portion of the temporal bone.
The lowest portion of this bone, the mastoid process, is palpable behind the
lobule.
The Middle Ear. In the air-ﬁlled middle ear, the ossicles—the malleus, the
incus, and the stapes—transform sound vibrations into mechanical waves for the
inner ear. The proximal end of the eustachian tube connects the middle ear to
the nasopharynx.

Two of the ossicles are visible through the tympanic membrane, and are angled obliquely and
held inward at its center by the malleus (Fig. 7-36).
Find the handle and the short process of the malleus, the two chief landmarks. From the umbo,
where the eardrum meets the tip of the malleus, a
light reﬂection called the cone of light fans downward and anteriorly. Above the short process lies a
small portion of the eardrum called the pars ﬂaccida. The remainder of the drum is the pars tensa.
Anterior and posterior malleolar folds, which
extend obliquely upward from the short process,
separate the pars ﬂaccida from the pars tensa, but

Pars flaccida
Short process of malleus
Incus
Handle of malleus
Pars tensa

Umbo
Cone of light

F I G U R E 7 - 3 6 . Right eardrum.

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

243

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
are usually invisible unless the eardrum is retracted. A second ossicle, the incus,
can sometimes be seen through the drum.
The Inner Ear. The inner ear includes the cochlea, the semicircular canals,
and the distal end of the auditory nerve, also known as the vestibulocochlear nerve,
or CN VIII. Movements of the stapes vibrate the perilymph in the labyrinth of the
semicircular canals and the hair cells and endolymph in the ducts of the cochlea,
producing electrical nerve impulses transmitted by the auditory nerve to the
brain.

Much of the middle ear and all of the inner ear are inaccessible to direct examination. Assess their condition by testing auditory function.
Hearing Pathways. The ﬁrst part of the hearing pathway, from the external ear through the middle ear, is known as the conductive phase. The second part
of the pathway, involving the cochlea and cochlear nerve, is the sensorineural
phase (Fig. 7-37).

Sensorineural

Air conduction

Bone conduction

Hearing disorders of the external and
middle ear cause conductive hearing
loss. External ear causes include cerumen impaction, infection (otitis
externa), trauma, squamous cell carcinoma, and benign bony growths such
as exostoses or osteomas. Middle ear
disorders include otitis media, congenital conditions, cholesteatomas and
otosclerosis, tumors, and perforation of
the tympanic membrane.
Disorders of the inner ear cause sensorineural hearing loss from congenital and hereditary conditions,
presbycusis, viral infections such as
rubella and cytomegalovirus, Ménière
disease, noise exposure, ototoxic drug
exposure, and acoustic neuroma.44

F I G U R E 7 - 3 7 . Hearing pathways.

Air conduction (AC) describes the normal ﬁrst phase in the hearing pathway.
An alternative pathway, known as bone conduction (BC), bypasses the external
and middle ear and is used for testing purposes. A vibrating tuning fork,
placed on the head, sets the bone of the skull into vibration and stimulates
the cochlea directly. In those with normal hearing, AC is more sensitive than
BC (AC > BC).
Equilibrium. The labyrinth of three semicircular canals in the inner ear
senses the position and movements of the head and helps maintain balance.
Techniques of Examination
The Auricle. Inspect the auricle and surrounding tissue for deformities,
lumps, or skin lesions.
244

See Table 7-19, Lumps on or Near the
Ear, p. 286.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
If ear pain, discharge, or inﬂammation is present, move the auricle up and down,
press the tragus, and press ﬁrmly just behind the ear.
Ear Canal and Drum. To see the
ear canal and drum, use an otoscope with
the largest ear speculum that inserts easily into the canal. Position the patient’s
head so that you can see comfortably
through the otoscope. To straighten the
ear canal, grasp the auricle ﬁrmly but
gently and pull it upward, backward, and
slightly away from the head (Fig. 7-38).

Movement of the auricle and tragus
(the “tug test”) is painful in acute otitis
externa (inflammation of the ear
canal), but not in otitis media (inflammation of the middle ear). Tenderness
behind the ear occurs in otitis media.

F I G U R E 7 - 3 8 . Straighten the ear
canal to insert the otoscope.

Holding the otoscope handle between your thumb and ﬁngers, brace your hand
against the patient’s face (Fig. 7-39). Your hand and instrument can then follow
unexpected movements by the patient. (If you are uncomfortable switching
hands for the left ear, as shown in Figure 7-40, you may reach over that ear to
pull it up and back with your left hand and hold the otoscope steady with your
right hand as you gently insert the speculum.)
Insert the speculum gently into the ear canal, directing it somewhat down and
forward and through the hairs, if any.

Nontender nodular swellings covered
by normal skin deep in the ear canals
suggest exostoses (Fig. 7-41). These
are nonmalignant overgrowths which
may obscure the drum.

F I G U R E 7 - 4 1 . Exostosis.

F I G U R E 7 - 3 9 . Brace your hand
and gently insert the speculum.

F I G U R E 7 - 4 0 . Insert the
speculum at a slight downward angle.

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

245

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Inspect the ear canal, noting any discharge, foreign bodies, redness of the skin, or
swelling. Cerumen, which varies in color and consistency from yellow and ﬂaky
to brown and sticky or even to dark and hard, may wholly or partly obscure your
view.

In acute otitis externa (Fig. 7-43), the
canal is often swollen, narrowed, moist,
pale, and tender. It may be reddened.

Pars flaccida
Short process of malleus
Incus
Handle of malleus
Pars tensa

Umbo
Cone of light

F I G U R E 7 - 4 3 . Acute otitis externa.

F I G U R E 7 - 4 2 . Anatomy of the right eardrum.

In chronic otitis externa, the skin of the
canal is often thickened, red, and itchy.

Inspect the eardrum, noting its color and contour (Fig. 7-42). The cone of light—
usually easy to see—helps to orient you.

Look for the red bulging drum of acute
purulent otitis media30 and for the amber
drum of a serous effusion. See Table 7-20,
Abnormalities of the Eardrum, pp. 287–
288 and Table 18-7, Abnormalities of the
Eyes, Ears, and Mouth, p. 916.

Identify the handle of the malleus, noting its position, and inspect the short process
of the malleus.

An unusually prominent short process
and a prominent handle that looks more
horizontal suggest a retracted drum.

Gently move the speculum so that you can see as much of the drum as possible,
including the pars ﬂaccida superiorly and the margins of the pars tensa. Look for
any perforations. The anterior and inferior margins of the drum may be obscured
by the curving wall of the ear canal.
Mobility of the eardrum can be evaluated with a pneumatic otoscope (see
p. 870).

A serous effusion, a thickened drum,
or purulent otitis media may decrease
mobility. If there is a perforation,
there will be no mobility.

Testing Auditory Acuity—Whispered Voice Test. To begin screening,
ask the patient “Do you feel you have a hearing loss or difﬁculty hearing?” If the
patient reports hearing loss, proceed to the whispered voice test.

Patients who answer “yes” are twice as
likely to have a hearing deficit; for
patients who report normal hearing
the likelihood of moderate to severe
hearing impairment is only 0.13.66

The whispered voice test is a reliable screening test for hearing loss if the examiner uses a standard method of testing and exhales before whispering. For best
results, follow the steps on the next page.

Sensitivity is 90% to 100% and specificity 70% to 87%.66–69 This test
detects significant hearing loss of
greater than 30 decibels. A formal
hearing test is still the gold standard.

246

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

Whispered Voice Test for Auditory Acuity
Stand 2 feet behind the seated patient so that the patient cannot read your
lips.68
● Occlude the nontest ear with a ﬁnger and gently rub the tragus in a circular
motion to prevent transfer of sound to the nontest ear.
● Exhale a full breath before whispering to ensure a quiet voice.
● Whisper a combination of three numbers and letters, such as 3-U-1. Use a
diﬀerent number/letter combination for the other ear.
● Interpretation:
● Normal: Patient repeats initial sequence correctly.
● Normal: Patient responds incorrectly, so test a second time with a diﬀerent
number/letter combination; patient repeats at least three out of the possible six numbers and letters correctly.
● Abnormal: Four of the six possible numbers and letters are incorrect. Conduct further testing by audiometry. (The Weber and Rinne tests are less
accurate and precise.)66
●

Testing for Conductive Versus Neurosensory Hearing Loss: Tuning
Fork Tests. For patients failing the whispered voice test, the Weber and Rinne
fork tests may help determine if the hearing loss is conductive or sensorineural
in origin. However, their precision, or test–retest reproducibility, and their accuracy compared to air–bone gap reference standards have been questioned.66

Note that older adults with presbycusis have higher frequency hearing
loss, making them more likely to miss
consonants, which have higher frequency sounds than vowels.

Note also that tuning fork tests do not
distinguish normal hearing from bilateral sensorineural loss or from mixed
conductive–sensorineural loss. Sensitivity of the Weber test is about 55%; specificity for sensorineural loss is about
79%, and for conductive loss, 92%. Sensitivity and specificity of the Rinne test
are 60% to 90% and 95% to 98%.70

To conduct these tests, make sure the
room is quiet, and use a tuning fork of
512 Hz. These frequencies fall within
the range of conversational speech,
namely 500 to 3,000 Hz and between
45 and 60 decibels.

Set the fork into light vibration by
briskly stroking it between the thumb
) or by tapping it
and index ﬁnger (
on your forearm just in front of your
elbow.
■ Test for lateralization (Weber test).

Place the base of the lightly vibrating tuning fork ﬁrmly on top of the
patient’s head or on the midforehead (Fig. 7-44).
F I G U R E 7 - 4 4 . Weber test.

In unilateral conductive hearing loss,
sound is heard in (lateralized to) the
impaired ear. Explanations include
otosclerosis, otitis media, perforation
of the eardrum, and cerumen. See
Table 7-21, Patterns of Hearing Loss,
p. 289.

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

247

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Ask where the patient hears the sound: on one side or both sides? Normally, the
vibration is heard in the midline or equally in both ears. If nothing is heard, try
again, pressing the fork more ﬁrmly on the head. Restrict this test to patients with
unilateral hearing loss since patients with normal hearing may lateralize, and
patients with bilateral conductive or sensorineural deﬁcits will not lateralize.
■ Compare AC and BC (Rinne test). Place the base of a lightly vibrating tuning fork

on the mastoid bone, behind the ear and level with the canal (Fig. 7-45). When
the patient can no longer hear the sound, quickly place the fork close to the ear
canal and ask if the patient hears a vibration (Fig. 7-46). Here, the “U” of the
fork should face forward, which maximizes sound transmission for the patient.
Normally, the sound is heard longer through air than through bone (AC > BC).

F I G U R E 7 - 4 5 . Test bone conduction.

In unilateral sensorineural hearing
loss, sound is heard in the good ear.

In conductive hearing loss, sound is
heard through bone as long as or longer than it is through air (BC = AC or
BC > AC). In sensorineural hearing loss,
sound is heard longer through air
(AC > BC).

F I G U R E 7 - 4 6 . Test air conduction.

The Nose and Paranasal Sinuses
Anatomy and Physiology. Review
the terms that describe the external
anatomy of the nose (Fig. 7-47).

Approximately the upper third of the
nose is supported by bone, the lower two
thirds by cartilage. Air enters the nasal
cavity through the anterior naris on either
side, then passes into the widened area
known as the vestibule and on through
the narrow nasal passage to the nasopharynx.

Bridge

Dorsum

Tip
Ala nasi
Anterior
naris

Vestibule

F I G U R E 7 - 4 7 . External anatomy of the nose.

248

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The medial wall of each nasal cavity is formed by
the nasal septum, which, like the external nose, is
supported by both bone and cartilage (Fig. 7-48).
It is covered by a mucous membrane well supplied
with blood. The vestibule, unlike the rest of the
nasal cavity, is lined with hair-bearing skin, not
mucosa.

Frontal sinus
Cranial cavity
Sphenoid sinus

Cartilaginous portion
of nasal septum

Bony portion
of nasal septum

Hard palate
Soft palate

F I G U R E 7 - 4 8 . Medial wall—left nasal cavity (mucosa removed).

Laterally, the anatomy is more complex (Fig. 7-49).
Curving bony structures, the turbinates, covered by a
highly vascular mucous membrane, protrude into the
nasal cavity. Below each turbinate is a groove, or
meatus, each named according to the turbinate above
it. The nasolacrimal duct drains into the inferior
meatus; most of the paranasal sinuses drain into the
middle meatus. Their openings are not usually visible.

Frontal sinus
Cranial cavity
Superior turbinate
Middle turbinate
Inferior turbinate
Nasopharynx

Vestibule

The additional surface area provided by the turbinates
and their overlying mucosa aids the nasal cavities in
their principal functions: cleansing, humidiﬁcation,
and temperature control of inspired air.

Soft
palate

Hard palate

Opening to
eustachian
tube

F I G U R E 7 - 4 9 . Lateral wall—nasal cavity.

The paranasal sinuses are air-ﬁlled cavities within the bones of the skull. Like the
nasal cavities into which they drain, they are lined with mucous membrane.
Their locations are diagrammed in Figure 7-50. Only the frontal and maxillary
sinuses are readily accessible to clinical examination (Fig. 7-51).
Frontal
sinus

Orbit

Frontal
sinus

Middle
turbinate
Maxillary
sinus
Inferior
turbinate

Maxillary
sinus

Ethmoid
sinus
Middle
meatus
Inferior
meatus

F I G U R E 7 - 5 0 . Cross-section of nasal cavity—anterior view.

F I G U R E 7 - 5 1 . Frontal and maxillary sinuses.

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

249

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Techniques of Examination. Inspect the anterior and inferior surfaces of
the nose. Gentle pressure on the tip of the nose with your thumb usually widens
the nostrils. Use a penlight or otoscope light to obtain a partial view of each nasal
vestibule. If the nasal tip is tender, be gentle and manipulate the nose as little as
possible.

Tenderness of the nasal tip or alae
suggests local infection such as a
furuncle, particularly if there is a small
erythematous and swollen area.

Note any asymmetry or deformity of the nose.

Test for nasal obstruction, if indicated, by pressing on each ala nasi in turn and
asking the patient to breathe in.

Inspect the inside of the nares with an otoscope and the largest available ear speculum.*
Tilt the patient’s head back a bit and insert the speculum gently into the vestibule of
each nostril, avoiding contact with the sensitive nasal septum (Fig. 7-53). Hold the
otoscope handle to one side to avoid the patient’s chin and improve your mobility.
By directing the speculum posteriorly, then upward in small steps, try to see the
inferior and middle turbinates, the nasal septum, and the narrow nasal passage
between them, as shown in Figure 7-54. Some asymmetry of the two sides is normal.

Vestibule

F I G U R E 7 - 5 2 . Deviation of the
lower septum.

Deviation of the lower septum is common and may be easily visible, as in
Figure 7-52. Deviation seldom
obstructs air flow.

Middle
turbinate
Nasal
passage
Septum
Inferior
turbinate

F I G U R E 7 - 5 3 . Inspect
inside the nares.

F I G U R E 7 - 5 4 . Inferior and middle
turbinates.

Inspect the nasal mucosa, the nasal septum, and any abnormalities. Inspect:
■ The nasal mucosa that covers the septum and turbinates. Note its color and

any swelling, bleeding, or exudate. If exudate is present, note its character:
clear, mucopurulent, or purulent. The nasal mucosa is normally somewhat
redder than the oral mucosa.
■ The nasal septum. Note any deviation, inﬂammation, or perforation of the

septum. The lower anterior portion of the septum (where the patient’s ﬁnger
can reach) is a common source of epistaxis (nosebleed).
*A nasal illuminator, equipped with a short wide nasal speculum but lacking an otoscope’s magniﬁcation, may also be used, but structures look much smaller. Otolaryngologists use special
equipment not widely available in general practice.

250

In viral rhinitis, the mucosa is reddened and swollen; in allergic rhinitis,
it may be pale, bluish, or red.

Fresh blood or crusting may be seen.
Causes of septal perforation include
trauma, surgery, and intranasal use of
cocaine or amphetamines, which also
cause septal ulceration.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
■ Any abnormalities such as ulcers or polyps.

Nasal polyps (Fig. 7-55) are pale
saclike growths of inflamed tissue
that can obstruct the air passage or
sinuses, seen in allergic rhinitis, aspirin
sensitivity, asthma, chronic sinus
infections, and cystic fibrosis.36
Malignant tumors of the nasal cavity
occur rarely, associated with exposure
to tobacco or chronically inhaled
toxins.

F I G U R E 7 - 5 5 . Nasal polyps.

Inspection of the nasal cavity through the anterior naris is usually limited to the
vestibule, the anterior portion of the septum, and the lower and middle turbinates. Examination of posterior abnormalities requires a nasopharyngeal mirror
and technique is beyond the scope of this book.
Place all nasal and ear specula outside your instrument case after use; then
discard or clean and disinfect them appropriately. Check the policies of your
institution.
Palpate for sinus tenderness. Press up on the frontal sinuses from under the bony
brows, avoiding pressure on the eyes (Fig. 7-56). Then press up on the maxillary
sinuses (Fig. 7-57).

F I G U R E 7 - 5 6 . Palpate the frontal
sinuses.

Local tenderness, together with
symptoms such as facial pain, pressure or fullness, purulent nasal discharge, nasal obstructions, and smell
disorder, especially when present for
>7 days, suggest acute bacterial
rhonosinusitis involving the frontal or
maxillary sinuses.34–36,71

F I G U R E 7 - 5 7 . Palpate the
maxillary sinuses.

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

251

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

Mouth and Pharynx
Anatomy and Physiology. The
lips are muscular folds that surround the
entrance to the mouth. When opened,
the gums (gingiva) and teeth are visible
(Fig. 7-58). Note the scalloped shape of
the gingival margins and the pointed
interdental papillae.

Gingival margin

Upper lip
(everted)

Interdental
papillae

The gingiva is ﬁrmly attached to the teeth
and to the maxilla and mandible in which
they are seated. In lighter-skinned people, the gingiva is pale or coral pink and
lightly stippled. In darker-skinned people, it may be diffusely or partly brown, as
shown below. A midline mucosal fold,
called a labial frenulum, connects each lip F I G U R E 7 - 5 8 . Gingiva and interdental
with the gingiva. A shallow gingival sulcus papillae.
between the gum’s thin margin and each
tooth is not readily visible (but is probed and measured by dentists). Adjacent to
the gingiva is the alveolar mucosa, which merges with the labial mucosa of the lip
(Fig. 7-59).

Gingiva
Alveolar
mucosa

Labial
frenulum
Labial
mucosa

F I G U R E 7 - 5 9 . Alveolar and labial mucosa, labial frenulum.

252

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Each tooth, composed chieﬂy of dentin, lies rooted in a bony socket with only
its enamel-covered crown exposed. Small blood vessels and nerves enter the
tooth through its apex and pass into the pulp canal and pulp chamber
(Fig. 7-60).
Note that there are 32 adult teeth, conventionally numbered 1 to 16 right to left
on the upper jaw and 17 to 32 left to right on the lower jaw (Fig. 7-61).
Crown
Enamel
Gingival
margin

Gingival
sulcus

Gingiva

Dentin

Medial (central)
Canine Lateral incisor
(cuspid) incisor
1st premolar
(bicuspid)
2nd premolar
(bicuspid)

Pulp
chamber

1st molar
(6-year
molar)

Bone
Root
Pulp
canal

2nd molar
(12-year
molar)

Apex

3rd molar
(wisdom
tooth)

F I G U R E 7 - 6 0 . Anatomy of a tooth.

F I G U R E 7 - 6 1 . Adult teeth.

The dorsum of the tongue is covered
with papillae, giving it a rough surface. Some of these papillae look like
red dots, which contrast with the
thin white coat that often covers the
tongue. This patient has an erythematous posterior pharynx (Fig. 7-62).

Papillae

F I G U R E 7 - 6 2 . Dorsal papillae of the tongue.

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

253

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The undersurface of the tongue has no papillae.
Note the midline lingual frenulum that connects
the tongue to the ﬂoor of the mouth and the
ducts of the submandibular gland (Wharton
ducts) which pass forward and medially
(Fig. 7-63). They open on papillae that lie on
each side of the lingual frenulum. The paired
sublingual salivary glands lie just under the
ﬂoor of the mouth mucosa.

Lingual
frenulum

Vein
Duct of
submandibular
gland

Above and behind the tongue rises an arch
formed by the anterior and posterior pillars, the
soft palate, and the uvula (Fig. 7-64). A meshwork of small blood vessels may web the soft
palate. The posterior pharynx is visible in the
recess behind the soft palate and tongue.
F I G U R E 7 - 6 3 . Undersurface of the tongue.

In Figure 7-64, note the right tonsil protruding
from the hollowed tonsillar fossa, or cavity,
between the anterior and posterior pillars. In
adults, tonsils are often small or absent, as in
the empty left tonsillar fossa.

Hard palate
Posterior
pillar
Anterior
pillar
Soft palate
Right
tonsil

Uvula
Posterior
pharynx
Tongue

F I G U R E 7 - 6 4 . Anatomy of the posterior pharynx.

The buccal mucosa lines the cheeks. Each parotid
duct, sometimes termed Stensen duct, opens
onto the buccal mucosa near the upper second
molar. Its location is frequently marked by its
own small papilla (Fig. 7-65).

Opening of
the parotid
duct
Papilla
Upper lip
(retracted)

Buccal
mucosa

F I G U R E 7 - 6 5 . Buccal mucosa and parotid duct.

254

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Techniques of Examination. If the patient wears dentures, offer a paper
towel and ask the patient to remove them so that you can inspect the underlying
mucosa. If you detect any suspicious ulcers or nodules, put on a glove and
palpate any lesions, noting any thickening or inﬁltration of the tissues that might
suggest malignancy.

Bright red edematous mucosa underneath a denture suggests denture stomatitis (denture sore mouth). There
may be ulcers or papillary granulation
tissue.

Inspect the following:
The Lips. Observe their color and moisture, and note any lumps, ulcers,
cracking, or scaliness.

Watch for central cyanosis or pallor
from anemia. See Table 7-22, Abnormalities of the Lips, pp. 290–291.

The Oral Mucosa. Look into the
patient’s mouth and, with a good light
and the help of a tongue blade (Fig. 7-66),
inspect the oral mucosa for color, ulcers
(Fig. 7-67), white patches, and nodules.

In this patient (Fig. 7-66), the wavy white
line on the adjacent buccal mucosa developed where the upper and lower teeth
meet, related to irritation from sucking or
chewing.

F I G U R E 7 - 6 7 . Aphthous ulcer
on the labial mucosa.

F I G U R E 7 - 6 6 . Inspect the oral
mucosa.

See Table 7-23, Findings in the Pharynx, Palate, and Oral Mucosa, pp. 292–
294.

The Gums and Teeth. Note the color of the gums, which are normally
pink. Brown patches may be present, especially but not exclusively in darkskinned individuals.

Redness of the gingiva suggests gingivitis, a black line might indicate lead
poisoning.

Inspect the gum margins and the interdental papillae for swelling or ulceration.

The interdental papillae are swollen in
gingivitis. See Table 7-24, Findings in
the Gums and Teeth, pp. 295–296.

Inspect the teeth. Are any of them missing, discolored, misshapen, or abnormally
positioned? To assess tooth, jaw, or facial pain, palpate the teeth for looseness
and the gums with your gloved thumb and index ﬁnger.
The Roof of the Mouth. Inspect the color and architecture of the hard
palate.

Torus palatinus is a startling but
benign midline lump (see p. 293).

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

255

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The Tongue and the Floor of the
Mouth. Ask the patient to put out his or
her tongue (Fig. 7-68). Inspect it for symmetry—a test of the hypoglossal nerve (CN
XII) (Fig. 7-69).

Note the color and texture of the dorsum of
the tongue.
F I G U R E 7 - 6 9 . Asymmetric
protrusion suggests a lesion of CN XII
(tongue points toward the side of the
lesion).

F I G U R E 7 - 6 8 . Inspect the
dorsum of the tongue.

Inspect entire oral cavity, especially the sides and undersurface of the tongue and
the ﬂoor of the mouth, areas where cancer often develops. Note any white or
reddened areas, nodules, or ulcerations.
Wearing gloves, palpate any lesions. Ask the patient to protrude the tongue. With
your right hand, grasp the tip of the tongue with a square of gauze and gently
pull it to the patient’s left. Inspect the side of the tongue, and then palpate it with
your gloved left hand, feeling for any induration (Figs. 7-70 and 7-71). Reverse
the procedure for the other side.

Men aged >50 years, smokers, and
heavy users of chewing tobacco and
alcohol are at highest risk for cancers of
the tongue and oral cavity, usually
squamous cell carcinomas on the side or
base of the tongue. Any persistent nodule or ulcer, red or white, is suspect,
especially if indurated. These discolored
lesions represent erythroplakia and leukoplakia and should be biopsied.72,73
Note the carcinoma on the left side of
the tongue below. Inspection and palpation remain the standard for detection of oral cancers.74–76

F I G U R E 7 - 7 1 . Carcinoma on
tongue. (Vokes E, et al. Head and Neck Cancer. N
Engl J Med 1993;328:184 [arrows added]).

F I G U R E 7 - 7 0 . Grasp the tongue and inspect the lateral margins.

256

See Table 7-25, Findings in or Under
the Tongue, pp. 297–298.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The Pharynx. With the patient’s mouth open but the tongue not protruded, ask the patient to say “ah” or yawn. This action helps you see the posterior pharynx well. You can also ask the patient to “open the back of your throat”
since many adults have learned to inspect their own posterior pharynx while
looking into a mirror.

In CN X paralysis, the soft palate fails
to rise and the uvula deviates to the
opposite side (points “away from the
lesion”).
Failure
to rise

Deviated
to left

Alternatively, you can press a tongue blade ﬁrmly down on the midpoint of the
arched tongue—back far enough to visualize the pharynx but not so far that you
cause gagging. Simultaneously, ask for an “ah” or a yawn. Note the rise of the soft
palate—a test of CN X (the vagal nerve) (Fig. 7-72).

F I G U R E 7 - 7 2 . CN X paralysis.

Inspect the soft palate, anterior and posterior pillars, uvula, tonsils, and pharynx.
Note their color and symmetry and look for exudate, swelling, ulceration, or
tonsillar enlargement. If possible, palpate any suspicious area for induration or
tenderness. Tonsils have crypts, or deep infoldings of squamous epithelium,
where whitish spots of normal exfoliating epithelium may sometimes be seen.

Tonsillar exudates with a beefy red
uvula are common in streptococcal
pharyngitis, but warrant rapid antigen-detection testing or throat culture for diagnosis.39,77

Discard your tongue blade after use.

See Table 7-23, Findings in the Pharynx,
Palate, and Oral Mucosa, pp. 292–294.

The Neck
Anatomy and Physiology. For
descriptive purposes, divide each side of
the neck into two triangles bounded by
the sternocleidomastoid muscle (Fig.
7-73). Visualize the borders of the two
triangles as follows:
■ For the anterior triangle: the mandi-

ble above, the sternocleidomastoid
laterally, and the midline of the neck
medially.

Sternocleidomastoid
muscle

Trapezius
muscle

■ For the posterior triangle: the sterno-

cleidomastoid muscle, the trapezius,
and the clavicle. Note that a portion
of the omohyoid muscle crosses the
lower portion of this triangle and
can be mistaken for a lymph node or
mass.

Posterior
triangle

Anterior
triangle

Omohyoid
muscle
Clavicle

Manubrium of
the sternum

F I G U R E 7 - 7 3 . Anterior and posterior triangles of the neck.

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

257

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Great Vessels. Deep to the sternocleidomastoids run the great vessels of
the neck: the carotid artery and the internal jugular vein (Fig. 7-74). The external
jugular vein passes diagonally over the surface of the sternocleidomastoid and may
be helpful when trying to identify the jugular venous pressure (see pp. 374–378).

External
jugular vein

Carotid sinus
Carotid artery
Internal jugular vein
Clavicular and sternal heads
of sternocleidomastoid muscle

F I G U R E 7 - 7 4 . Great vessels of the neck.

Midline Structures and Thyroid Gland. Now identify the following
midline structures: (1) the mobile hyoid bone just below the mandible, (2) the
thyroid cartilage, readily identiﬁed by the notch on its superior edge, (3) the cricoid cartilage, (4) the tracheal rings, and (5) the thyroid gland (Fig. 7-75).

Hyoid bone
Thyroid
cartilage
Cricoid
cartilage
Thyroid
lobe
Sternocleidomastoid
muscle

Thyroid
isthmus

Trachea
Sternal
notch

Clavicle

Manubrium
of sternum

F I G U R E 7 - 7 5 . Midline structures of the neck.

258

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The thyroid gland is usually located above the suprasternal notch. The thyroid isthmus spans the second, third, and fourth tracheal rings just below the cricoid cartilage. The lateral lobes of the thyroid curve posteriorly around the sides of the trachea
and the esophagus; each is about 4 cm to 5 cm in length. Except in the midline, the
thyroid gland is covered by thin straplike muscles anchored to the hyoid bone and
more laterally by the sternocleidomastoids, which are readily visible.
Lymph Nodes. The lymph nodes of the head
and neck are variably classiﬁed. One classiﬁcation
is shown in Figure 7-76, together with the directions of lymphatic drainage. The deep cervical
chain is largely obscured by the overlying sternocleidomastoid muscle, but at its two extremes, the
tonsillar node and supraclavicular nodes may be
palpable. The submandibular nodes lie superﬁcial
to the submandibular gland, and should be differentiated. Nodes are normally round or ovoid,
smooth, and smaller than the submandibular
gland. The gland is larger and has a lobulated,
slightly irregular surface (see p. 254).

Preauricular

Posterior
auricular
Tonsillar
Occipital

Superficial
cervical

Submental

Posterior cervical

Note that the tonsillar, submandibular, and submental nodes drain portions of the mouth and
throat as well as the face.

Submandibular

Supraclavicular

Lymphatic drainage patterns are helpful when
assessing possible malignancy or infection: For
suspected malignant or inﬂammatory lesions,
look for enlargement of the neighboring regional
lymph nodes; when a node is enlarged or tender,
look for a source in its nearby drainage area.

Deep cervical chain

External lymphatic drainage
Internal lymphatic drainage
(from mouth and throat)

F I G U R E 7 - 7 6 . Lymph nodes of the neck.

Techniques of Examination. Inspect the neck, noting its symmetry and
any masses or scars. Look for enlargement of the parotid or submandibular
glands, and note any visible lymph nodes.

A scar from past thyroid surgery is
a clue to unsuspected thyroid or
parathyroid disease.

The Lymph Nodes. Palpate the lymph nodes. Using the pads of your index
and middle ﬁngers, press gently, moving the skin over the underlying tissues in
each area. The patient should be relaxed, with the neck ﬂexed slightly forward
and, if needed, turned slightly toward the side being examined. You can usually
examine both sides at once, noting both the presence of lymph nodes as well as
asymmetry. For the submental node, however, it is helpful to feel with one hand
while bracing the top of the head with the other.

Feel in sequence for the following nodes (Fig. 7-77):
1. Preauricular—in front of the ear
2. Posterior auricular—superﬁcial to the mastoid process
CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

259

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

3. Occipital—at the base of the skull posteriorly

A pulsating “tonsillar node” is really the
carotid artery. A small hard tender “tonsillar node” high and deep between the
mandible and the sternocleidomastoid
is probably a styloid process.

4. Tonsillar—at the angle of the mandible
5. Submandibular—midway between the angle and the tip of the mandible.
These nodes are usually smaller and smoother than the lobulated submandibular gland against which they lie.
6. Submental—in the midline a few centimeters behind the tip of the mandible.
7. Superﬁcial cervical—superﬁcial to the
sternocleidomastoid.

1

8. Posterior cervical—along the anterior
edge of the trapezius.

2
3
7

9. Deep cervical chain—deep to the sternocleidomastoid and often inaccessible
to examination. Hook your thumb and
ﬁngers around either side of the sternocleidomastoid muscle to ﬁnd them.
10. Supraclavicular—deep in the angle
formed by the clavicle and the sternocleidomastoid.

9
8

4
6
5

10

External lymphatic drainage
Internal lymphatic drainage
(e.g., from mouth and throat)

F I G U R E 7 - 7 7 . Sequence for
examining lymph nodes.

Enlargement of a supraclavicular node,
especially on the left, suggests possible metastasis from a thoracic or an
abdominal malignancy.

Note lymph nodes size, shape, delimitation (discrete or matted together), mobility, consistency, and any tenderness. Small, mobile, discrete, nontender nodes,
sometimes termed “shotty,” are frequently found in normal people. Describe
enlarged nodes in two dimensions, maximal length and width, for example,
1 cm × 2 cm. Also note any overlying skin changes (erythema, induration, drainage, or breakdown).
Enlarged or tender nodes, if unexplained, call for (1) re-examination of
the regions they drain and (2) careful
assessment of lymph nodes in other
regions to identify regional from generalized lymphadenopathy.
For preauricular and cervical lymph
nodes, adopt the techniques to follow.
■ Using the pads of the second and third

ﬁngers, palpate the preauricular nodes
with a gentle rotary motion (Fig. 7-78).
Then examine the posterior auricular
and occipital lymph nodes.

260

F I G U R E 7 - 7 8 . Palpate the
preauricular nodes.

Tender nodes suggest inflammation;
hard or fixed nodes (fixed to underlying structures and not movable on
palpation) suggest malignancy.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
■ Palpate the anterior superﬁcial and deep cervical chains, located anterior and

superﬁcial to the sternocleidomastoid. Then palpate the posterior cervical
chain along the trapezius (anterior edge) and along the sternocleidomastoid
(posterior edge). Flex the patient’s neck slightly forward toward the side
being examined (Fig. 7-79). Examine the supraclavicular nodes in the angle
between the clavicle and the sternocleidomastoid (Fig. 7-80). If you feel
supraclavicular lymph nodes, a thorough work-up is warranted.

F I G U R E 7 - 7 9 . Palpate the
submandibular nodes.

If you palpate supraclavicular
lymph nodes, a thorough work-up
is warranted.

F I G U R E 7 - 8 0 . Palpate the
supraclavicular nodes.

Enlarged or tender nodes, if unexplained, call for (1) re-examination of the
regions they drain and (2) careful assessment of lymph nodes elsewhere so that
you can distinguish between regional and generalized lymphadenopathy.

Occasionally, you may mistake a band of muscle or an artery for a lymph node.
Unlike a muscle or an artery, you should be able to roll a node in two directions: up and down, and side to side. Neither a muscle nor an artery will pass
this test.

Generalized lymphadenopathy is seen
in multiple infectious, inflammatory,
or malignant conditions such as HIV
or AIDS, infectious mononucleosis,
lymphoma, leukemia, and sarcoidosis.

The Trachea and the Thyroid
Gland. To orient yourself to the
neck, identify the thyroid and cricoid
cartilages and the trachea below them.
■ Inspect the trachea for any deviation

from its usual midline position.
Then palpate for any deviation.
Place your ﬁnger along one side of
the trachea and note the space
between it and the sternocleidomastoid (Fig. 7-81). Compare it
with the other side. The spaces
should be symmetric.

Masses in the neck may cause tracheal
deviation to one side, raising suspicion of conditions in the thorax such
as a mediastinal mass, atelectasis,
or a large pneumothorax (see
pp. 339–340).

F I G U R E 7 - 8 1 . Palpate the trachea.

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

261

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
■ Auscultate breath sounds over the trachea. This allows subtle counting of the

respiratory rate and establishes a point of reference when assessing upper
versus lower airway causes of shortness of breath. When assessing shortness
of breath, always remember to listen over the trachea for stridor for upper
airway etiologies in addition to examining the lungs.

■ Inspect the neck for the thyroid gland. Tip the patient’s head slightly back. Using

tangential lighting directed downward from the tip of the patient’s chin,
inspect the region below the cricoid cartilage to identify the contours of the gland.
The shadowed lower border of the thyroid glands shown here is outlined by
arrows (Fig. 7-82).

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Stridor is an ominous, high-pitched
musical sound from severe subglottic
or tracheal obstruction that signals a
respiratory emergency. Causes include
epiglottitis,78 foreign body, goiter, and
stenosis from placement of an artificial airway. See also Chapter 8, Thorax
and Lungs, pp. 303–342.
The patient in Figures 7-83 and 7-84
has a goiter, defined as enlargement
of the thyroid gland to twice its normal size. Goiters may be simple, without nodules, or multinodular, and are
usually euthyroid.79–81

Thyroid
cartilage

Cricoid
cartilage

Thyroid
gland

F I G U R E 7 - 8 2 . Thyroid gland position at rest.
■ Observe the patient swallowing. Ask the patient to sip some water and to

extend the neck again and swallow. Watch for upward movement of the
thyroid gland, noting its contour and symmetry. The thyroid cartilage, the
cricoid cartilage, and the thyroid gland all rise with swallowing and then fall
to their resting positions.

F I G U R E 7 - 8 3 . Thyroid gland with
goiter at rest.

With swallowing, the lower border of
this large gland rises and looks less
symmetric.

F I G U R E 7 - 8 4 . Thyroid gland with
goiter while swallowing.

262

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
■ Conﬁrm your visual observations by palpating the gland outlines as you

stand facing the patient. This helps prepare you for the more systematic
palpation to follow.

See Table 7-26, Thyroid Enlargement
and Function, p. 299.

■ Palpate the thyroid gland. This may

seem difﬁcult at ﬁrst. Use the cues
from visual inspection. Find your
landmarks—the notched thyroid
cartilage and the cricoid cartilage
below it (Fig. 7-85). Locate the
thyroid isthmus, usually overlying
the second, third, and fourth tracheal rings.

Cricoid
cartilage

F I G U R E 7 - 8 5 . Palpate the thyroid gland.

Develop good technique by adopting the steps below, which outline the posterior
approach to palpation. The anterior approach is similar and yields comparable
ﬁndings.81 The thyroid gland is usually easier to palpate in a long slender neck.
In shorter necks, hyperextension of the neck may be helpful. If the lower pole of
the thyroid gland is not palpable, suspect a retrosternal location. If the thyroid
gland is retrosternal, below the suprasternal notch, it is often not palpable.

Steps for Palpating the Thyroid Gland
(Posterior Approach)
Ask the patient to ﬂex the neck slightly forward to relax the sternocleidomastoid muscles.
● Place the ﬁngers of both hands on the patient’s neck so that your index ﬁngers are just below the cricoid cartilage.
● Ask the patient to sip and swallow water as before. Feel for the thyroid isthmus rising up under your ﬁnger pads. It is often, but not always, palpable.
● Displace the trachea to the right with the ﬁngers of the left hand; with the
right-hand ﬁngers, palpate laterally for the right lobe of the thyroid in the
space between the displaced trachea and the relaxed sternocleidomastoid.
Find the lateral margin. In a similar fashion, examine the left lobe.
The lobes are somewhat harder to feel than the isthmus, so practice is
needed. The anterior surface of a lateral lobe is approximately the size of the
distal phalanx of the thumb and feels somewhat rubbery.
● Note the size, shape, and consistency (soft, ﬁrm, or hard) of the gland and
identify any nodules or tenderness. In general, benign (or colloid) nodules
tend to be more uniform, ovoid structures and are not ﬁxed to surrounding
tissue.
● If the thyroid gland is enlarged, listen over the lateral lobes with a stethoscope to
detect a bruit, a sound similar to a cardiac murmur but of not of cardiac origin.
●

When the thyroid gland is retrosternal,
below the suprasternal notch, it is
often not palpable.
Retrosternal goiters can cause hoarseness, shortness of breath, stridor, or
dysphagia from tracheal compression;
neck hyperextension and arm elevation may cause flushing from compression of the thoracic inlet from the
gland itself or from clavicular movement (Pemberton sign). Over 85% are
benign.82,83
Although physical characteristics of
the thyroid gland, such as size, shape,
and consistency, are important, assessment of thyroid function depends
on symptoms, signs elsewhere in the
body, and laboratory tests.84–89
The thyroid is soft in Graves disease
and may be nodular; it is firm in Hashimoto thyroiditis (though not always
uniformly) and malignancy.
The thyroid is tender in thyroiditis.
A localized systolic or continuous
bruit may be heard in hyperthyroidism
from Graves disease or toxic multinodular goiter.

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

263

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
For palpable solitary nodules, ultrasound and possible ﬁne-needle aspiration are
advised. Ultrasound usually reveals multiple additional nonpalpable nodules;
only 5% of nodules are malignant.90,91
The Carotid Arteries and Jugular Veins. Defer a detailed examination
of the neck vessels until the cardiovascular examination, when the patient is supine
with the head elevated to 30°. For jugular venous distention visible with the patient
in the sitting position, assess the heart and lungs promptly. Also be alert to unusually prominent arterial pulsations.

See Chapter 9, Cardiovascular System,
pp. 343–417.

Note that many clinicians would examine the CNs at this point while facing the
seated patient.

See Chapter 17, Nervous System,
pp. 711–796.

Jugular venous distention is a hallmark of heart failure.

Special Techniques
Eye Protrusion (Proptosis or Exophthalmos). For eyes with
exophthalmos, or unusual forward protrusion, stand behind the seated patient
and inspect from above. Draw the upper lids gently upward, then compare the
protrusion of the eyes and the relationship of the corneas to the lower lids. For
objective measurement, ophthalmologists use an exophthalmometer. This
instrument measures the distance between the lateral angle of the orbit and an
imaginary line across the most anterior point of the cornea. The upper limits of
normal are 20 to 22 mm.92–94

When protrusion exceeds normal, further evaluation by ultrasound or computerized tomography scan often follows.94

Nasolacrimal Duct Obstruction. This test helps identify the
cause of excessive tearing. Ask the
patient to look up. Press on the lower
lid close to the medial canthus, just
inside the rim of the bony orbit; this
compresses the lacrimal sac (Fig. 7-86).
Look for ﬂuid regurgitated out of the
puncta into the eye. Avoid this test if the
area is inﬂamed and tender.
Everting the Upper Eyelid to
Search for a Foreign Body. To
search thoroughly for a foreign body in
the eye, evert the upper lid following
the steps below.

Discharge of mucopurulent fluid from
the puncta suggests an obstructed
nasolacrimal duct.

F I G U R E 7 - 8 6 . Compress the lower
lid close to the medial canthus.

■ Ask the patient to look down and relax the eyes. Be reassuring and use

gentle deliberate movements. Raise the upper eyelid slightly so that the
264

Exophthalmos is present in approximately 60% of patients with Graves
ophthalmopathy and half of patients
with Graves disease from autoimmune
hyperthyroidism. Common symptoms
of Graves ophthalmopathy are diplopia
and tearing, grittiness, and pain from
corneal exposure. Eyelid retraction
(91%), extraocular muscle dysfunction
(43%), ocular pain (30%), and lacrimation (23%) are also common.92–94 See
also Table 7-27, Symptoms and Signs
of Thyroid Disorders, p. 299.

A foreign body in the eye often
involves dust, a speck of sand, a paint
chip, an insect, or a dislodged eyelash
trapped underneath the lid, causing
patients to sense something in their
eye. Foreign bodies can be superficial,
sticking to the eye surface or beneath
the lid, or penetrating—usually a
piece of metal that pierces the outer
cornea or sclera.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
lashes protrude, then grasp the upper
eyelashes and pull them gently down
and forward (Fig. 7-87).
■ Place a small stick such as a tongue

blade or an applicator at least 1 cm
above the lid margin at the upper
border of the tarsal plate. Push down
on the tongue blade as you raise the
edge of the lid, thus everting the eyelid or turning it “inside out.” Do not
press on the eyeball itself (Fig. 7-88).

F I G U R E 7 - 8 7 . To evert eyelid,
pull down the upper eyelashes.

■ Secure the upper lashes against the

F I G U R E 7 - 8 8 . Using a tongue
blade, evert the edge of the lid.

This view allows you to see the upper
palpebral conjunctiva and look for a
foreign body that might be lodged
there.

eyebrow with your thumb and inspect
the palpebral conjunctiva (Fig. 7-89).
After your inspection, grasp the upper
eyelashes and pull them gently
forward. Ask the patient to look up.
The eyelid will return to its normal
position.

F I G U R E 7 - 8 9 . Inspect the
palpebral conjunctiva.

Swinging Flashlight Test. The swinging ﬂashlight test is a clinical test for
functional impairment of the optic nerves (Fig. 7-90). In dim light, note the
size of the pupils. After asking the patient to gaze into the distance, swing the
beam of a penlight for 1 to 2 seconds ﬁrst into one pupil, then into the other.
Normally, each illuminated eye constricts promptly. The opposite eye also constricts consensually.

Direct

Consensual

Consensual

“Dilation”

RIGHT

LEFT

RIGHT

LEFT
(optic nerve damage)

In left-sided optic nerve damage, the
pupils usually react as follows: When
the light beam shines into the normal
right eye, there is brisk constriction of
both pupils (direct response on the
right and consensual response on the
left). When the light swings over to
the abnormal left eye, partial dilation
of both pupils will occur. The afferent
stimulus on the left is reduced, so the
efferent signals to both pupils are also
reduced and a net dilation occurs. This
demonstrates an afferent pupillary
defect, sometimes termed a Marcus
Gunn pupil.

F I G U R E 7 - 9 0 . Swinging ﬂashlight test.

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

265

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Recording Your Findings
Initially you may use sentences to describe your ﬁndings; later you will use
phrases. The style in the next box contains phrases appropriate for most
write-ups.
Recording the Physical Examination—The Head,
Eyes, Ears, Nose, and Throat (HEENT)
HEENT: Head—The skull is normocephalic/atraumatic (NC/AT). Hair with average texture. Eyes—Visual acuity 20/20 bilaterally. Sclera white, conjunctiva pink.
Pupils are 4 mm constricting to 2 mm, equally round and reactive to light and
accommodations. Disc margins sharp; no hemorrhages or exudates, no arteriolar narrowing. Ears—Acuity good to whispered voice. Tympanic membranes
(TMs) with good cone of light. Weber midline. AC > BC. Nose—Nasal mucosa
pink, septum midline; no sinus tenderness. Throat (or Mouth)—Oral mucosa
pink, dentition good, pharynx without exudates.
Neck—Trachea midline. Neck supple; thyroid isthmus palpable, lobes not felt.
Lymph Nodes—No cervical, axillary, epitrochlear, inguinal adenopathy.
OR
Head—The skull is normocephalic/atraumatic. Frontal balding. Eyes—Visual
acuity 20/100 bilaterally. Sclera white; conjunctiva injected. Pupils constrict
3 mm to 2 mm, equally round and reactive to light and accommodation. Disc
margins sharp; no hemorrhages or exudates. Arteriolar-to-venous ratio (AV
ratio) 2:4; no AV nicking. Ears—Acuity diminished to whispered voice; intact to
spoken voice. TMs clear. Nose—Mucosa swollen with erythema and clear drainage. Septum midline. Tender over maxillary sinuses. Throat—Oral mucosa pink,
dental caries in lower molars, pharynx erythematous, no exudates.
Neck—Trachea midline. Neck supple; thyroid isthmus midline, lobes palpable
but not enlarged.
Lymph Nodes—Submandibular and anterior cervical lymph nodes tender,
1 cm × 1 cm, rubbery and mobile; no posterior cervical, epitrochlear, axillary, or
inguinal lymphadenopathy.

266

These findings suggest myopia and
mild arteriolar narrowing as well as
upper respiratory infection.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 7-1 Primary Headaches

Headaches are classiﬁed as primary, without underlying pathology, or secondary, with a serious underlying cause often warranting
urgent attention. Secondary headaches are more likely to occur after age 50 years with a sudden severe onset and should be ruled out
before making the diagnosis of a primary headache.3 About 90% of headaches are primary headaches and fall into four categories:
tension, migraine, cluster, and chronic daily headache. The features of tension, migraine, and cluster headaches are highlighted below.
Chronic daily headache is not a diagnosis, but a category containing pre-existing headaches that have been transformed into more
pronounced forms of migraines, chronic tension-type headaches, and medication-overuse headaches and last more than 15 days a
month for more than 3 months.16 Risk factors include obesity; more than one headache a week; caffeine ingestion; use of headache
medications >10 days a month, such as analgesics, ergots, and triptans; and sleep and mood disorders.
Tension

Migraines

Cluster

Process

Process unclear—possibly
heightened CNS pain sensitivity.
Involves pericranial muscle
tenderness; etiology also unclear

Neuronal dysfunction, possibly of brainstem
origin, involving low serotonin level,
spreading cortical depression and
trigeminovascular activation; types: with
aura, without aura, variants

Process unclear—possibly
hypothalamic then
trigeminoautonomic
activation

Lifetime
Prevalence

Most common headache (40%);
prevalence about 50%

10% of headaches; prevalence 18% of U.S.
adults; affects ∼15% of women, 6% of men

<1%, more common in men.

Location

Usually bilateral; may be
generalized or localized to the
back of the head and upper neck
or to the frontotemporal area

Unilateral in ∼70%; bifrontal or global in
∼30%

Unilateral, usually behind or
around the eye or temple

Quality and
Severity

Steady; pressing or tightening;
nonthrobbing pain; mild to
moderate intensity

Throbbing or aching, pain, moderate to
severe in intensity; preceded by an aura in
up to 30%

Sharp, continuous, intense;
severe in intensity

Onset

Gradual

Fairly rapid, reaching a peak in
1–2 hours

Abrupt; peaks within
minutes

Duration

30 minutes to 7 days

4–72 hours

15 minutes to 3 hours

Course

Episodic; may be chronic

Recurrent—usually monthly, but weekly in
∼10%; peak incidence early to midadolescence

Episodic, clustered in time,
with several each day for
4–8 weeks and then relief for
6–12 months

Associated
Symptoms

Sometimes photophobia,
phonophobia; scalp tenderness;
nausea absent

Prodrome: nausea, vomiting, photophobia,
phonophobia; aura in 30%; either visual
(ﬂickering, zig-zagging lines), or motor
(paresthesias of hand, arm, or face, or
language dysfunction)

Unilateral autonomic
symptoms: lacrimation,
rhinorrhea, miosis, ptosis,
eyelid edema, conjunctival
infection

Triggers/
Factors That
Aggravate or
Provoke

Sustained muscle tension, as in
driving or typing; stress; sleep
disturbances

Alcohol, certain foods, or stress may provoke;
also menses, high altitude; aggravated by
noise and bright light

During attack, sensitivity to
alcohol may increase

Factors That
Relieve

Possibly massage, relaxation

Quiet, dark room; sleep; sometimes transient
relief from pressure on the involved artery

Timing

Sources: Headache Classiﬁcation Committee of the International Headache Society (IHS). The International Classiﬁcation of Headache Disorders, 3rd edition (beta
version). Cephalalgia. 2013;33:629; Lipton RB, Bigal ME, Steiner TJ, et al. Classiﬁcation of primary headaches. Neurology. 2004;63:427; Sun-Edelstein C, Bigal ME,
Rappoport AM. Chronic migraine and medication overuse headache: clarifying the current International Headache Society classiﬁcation criteria. Cephalalgia.
2009;29:445; Lipton RB, Stewart WF, Seymour D, et al. Prevalence and burden of migraine in the United States: data from the American Migraine Study II.
Headache. 2001;41:646; Fumal A, Schoenen J. Tension-type headache: current research and clinical management. Lancet Neurol. 2008;7:70; Nesbitt AD, Goadsby PJ.
Cluster headache. BMJ. 2012;344:e2407.

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

267

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 7-2 Secondary
Headaches
and Cranial Neuralgias

Type

Process

Location

Quality and Severity

Secondary Headaches
Analgesic Rebound

Withdrawal of medication

Previous headache pattern

Variable

Around and over the eyes;
may radiate to the occipital
area

Steady, aching, dull

Headaches from Eye Disorders
Probably the sustained contraction of the
Errors of Refraction
extraocular muscles, and possibly of the
(farsightedness and
frontal, temporal, and occipital muscles
astigmatism, but not
nearsightedness)
Acute Glaucoma

Sudden increase in intraocular pressure
(see p. 270)

Pain in and around one eye

Steady, aching, often severe

Headache from
Sinusitis

Mucosal inﬂammation of the paranasal
sinuses

Usually frontal sinuses
above the eyes or over the
maxillary sinus

Aching or throbbing, severity
variable; consider possible
migraine

Meningitis

Viral or bacterial infection of the meninges Generalized
surrounding the brain and spinal cord

Steady or throbbing, very
severe

Subarachnoid
Hemorrhage—
“Thunderclap
Headache”

Bleeding from a ruptured cerebral saccular Generalized
aneurysm; rarely from AV malformation,
mycotic aneurysm

Very severe, “the worst of
my life”

Brain Tumor

Mass lesion causing displacement of or
traction on pain-sensitive arteries and
veins or pressure on nerves

Variable, including lobes of
brain, cerebellum, brainstem

Aching, steady, dull pain
worse on awakening the
better after several hours

Giant Cell (Temporal)
Arteritis

Transmural lymphocytic vasculitis often
involving multinucleated giant cells that
disrupts the internal elastic lamina of
large-caliber arteries

Localized near the involved
artery, most often the temporal artery in those > age
50, women > men (2:1
ratio)

Throbbing, generalized,
persistent; often severe

Postconcussion
Headache

Follows mild acceleration-deceleration
Often but not always localtraumatic brain injury; may involve axoized to the injured area
nal, cerebrovascular autoregulatory, neurochemical injury

Dull, aching, constant; may
have features of tension and
migraine headaches

Vascular compression of CN V, usually
Cheek, jaws, lips, or gums;
near entry to pons leading to focal demye- trigeminal nerve divisions 2
lination, aberrant discharge; 10% with
and 3 > 1
causative intracranial lesion

Shock-like, stabbing,
burning; severe

Cranial Neuralgias
Trigeminal Neuralgia
(CN V)

Note: Blanks appear in this table when the categories are not applicable or not usually helpful in assessing the problem.
Sources: Headache Classiﬁcation Committee of the International Headache Society (IHS). The International Classiﬁcation of Headache Disorders,
3rd ed. (beta version). Cephalalgia. 2013;33:629; Schwedt TJ, Matharu MS, Dodick DW. Thunderclap headache. Lancet Neurol. 2006;5:621; Van de
Beek D, de Gans J, Spanjaard L, et al. Clinical features and prognostic factors in adults with bacterial meningitis. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:1849;
Salvarini C, Cantini F, Hunder GG. Polymyalgia rheumatica and giant cell arteritis. Lancet. 2008;372:234; Smetana GW, Shmerling RH. Does this
patient have temporal arteritis? JAMA. 2002;287:92; Ropper AH, Gorson KC. Clinical practice. Concussion. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:166. American
College of Physicians. Neurology—MKSAP 16. Philadelphia, 2012.

268

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Timing
Course

Factors That
Aggravate or
Provoke

Associated
Symptoms

Factors That
Relieve

Onset

Duration

Variable

Depends on prior Depends on frequency Depends on prior headache patheadache pattern of “mini-withdrawals” tern

Gradual

Variable

Variable

Eye fatigue, “sandy” sensations in Prolonged use of the
eyes, redness of conjunctiva
eyes, particularly for
close work

Often rapid

Variable, may depend on treatment

Variable, may depend
on treatment

Blurred vision, nausea and vomiting; halos around lights, reddening of eye

Variable

Often daily several hours at a
time, persisting
until treatment

Often daily in a repeti- Local tenderness, nasal congestive pattern
tion, discharge, and fever

Fairly rapid,
usually <24
hours; may be
sudden onset

Variable, usually
days

Viral: usually
<1 week; bacterial:
persistent until treatment

Fever, stiff neck, photophobia,
change in mental status

Sudden onset;
can be less than
a minute

Variable, usually
days

Varies according to presenting severity and
level of consciousness;
worst if initial coma

Nausea, vomiting, loss of consciousness, neck pain. Possible
prior neck symptoms from “sentinel leaks”

Rebleeding, ↑ intracra- Subspecialty treatnial pressure, cerebral ments
edema

Variable

Often brief; deIntermittent but may
pends on location progress in intensity
and rate of
over a period of days
growth

Seizures, hemiparesis, ﬁeld cuts,
personality changes. Also nausea,
vomiting, vision change, gait
change

May be aggravated by Subspecialty treatcoughing, sneezing, or ments
sudden movements of
the head

Fever, carbon monoxDepends on cause
ide, hypoxia, withdrawal of caffeine, other
headache triggers
Rest of the eyes

Sometimes provoked
by mydriatic drops
May be aggravated by Nasal decongescoughing, sneezing, or tants, antibiotics
jarring the head
Immediate antibiotics until diagnosis of if bacterial or
viral

Gradual or rapid Variable

Recurrent or persistent Tenderness over temporal artery, Movement of neck and Often sterioids
over weeks to months adjacent scalp; fever (in ∼50%), shoulders
fatigue, weight loss; new headache (∼60%), jaw claudication
(∼50%), visual loss or blindness
(∼15%–20%), polymyalgia rheumatica (∼50%)

Within 7 days of Weeks to up to a
the injury up to year
3 months

Tends to diminish over Drowsiness, poor concentration,
time
confusion, memory loss, blurred
vision, dizziness, irritability, restlessness, fatigue

Mental and physical
exertion, straining,
stooping, emotional
excitement, alcohol

Rest; medication

Abrupt, paroxysmal

May recur daily for
Exhaustion from recurrent pain
weeks to months then
resolve; can be chronic
progressive

Touching certain areas
of the lower face or
mouth; chewing, talking, brushing teeth

Medication; neurovascular decompression

Each jab lasts seconds but recurs at
intervals of seconds or minutes

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

269

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 7-3 Red Eyes
Conjunctivitis

Subconjunctival Hemorrhage

Pattern of
Redness

Conjunctival injection: diffuse dilatation
of conjunctival vessels with redness that
tends to be maximal peripherally

Leakage of blood outside of the vessels, producing a homogeneous,
sharply demarcated, red area that resolves over 2 weeks

Pain

Mild discomfort rather than pain

Absent

Vision

Not affected except for temporary mild
blurring due to discharge

Not affected

Ocular
Discharge

Watery, mucoid, or mucopurulent

Absent

Pupil

Not affected

Not affected

Cornea

Clear

Clear

Signiﬁcance

Bacterial, viral, and other infections;
highly contagious; allergy; irritation

Often none. May result from trauma, bleeding disorders, or
sudden increase in venous pressure, as from cough

Corneal Injury or Infection

Acute Iritis

Acute Angle Closure
Glaucoma

Pattern of
Redness

Ciliary injection: The deeper vessels radiating from the limbus are dilated, creating a reddish violet ﬂush. Ciliary
injection is an important sign of these three conditions but is not always visible. The eye may be diffusely red
instead. Other signs of these serious disorders are pain, decreased vision, unequal pupils, and a clouded cornea.

Pain

Moderate to severe, superﬁcial

Moderate, aching, deep

Severe, aching, deep

Vision

Usually decreased

Decreased; photophobia

Decreased

Ocular
Discharge

Watery or purulent

Absent

Absent

Pupil

Not affected unless iritis develops

Small and irregular

Dilated, ﬁxed

Cornea

Changes depending on cause

Clear or slightly clouded; injection
conﬁned to corneal limbus

Steamy, cloudy

Signiﬁcance

Abrasions, and other injuries; viral and
bacterial infections

Associated with systemic
infection, Herpes zoster,
tuberculosis, or autoimmune
diseases; refer promptly

Acute increase in
intraocular pressure
constitutes an emergency

Source: Leibowitz HM. The red eye. N Engl J Med. 2000;342:345.

270

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 7-4 Dizziness and Vertigo

“Dizziness” is a nonspeciﬁc term used by patients encompassing several disorders that clinicians must carefully sort out. A
detailed history usually identiﬁes the primary etiology. It is important to learn the speciﬁc meanings of the following terms or
conditions:
■ Vertigo—a spinning sensation accompanied by nystagmus and ataxia; usually from peripheral vestibular dysfunction (∼40% of
“dizzy” patients) but may be from a central brainstem lesion (∼10%; causes include atherosclerosis, multiple sclerosis,
vertebrobasilar migraine, or transient ischemic attack [TIA])
■ Presyncope—a near faint from “feeling faint or lightheaded”; causes include orthostatic hypotension, especially from
medication, arrhythmias, and vasovagal attacks (∼5%)
■ Disequilibrium—unsteadiness or imbalance when walking, especially in older patients, causes include fear of walking, visual
loss, weakness from musculoskeletal problems, and peripheral neuropathy (up to 15%)
■ Psychiatric—causes include anxiety, panic disorder, hyperventilation, depression, somatization disorder, alcohol, and
substance abuse (∼10%)
■ Multifactorial or unknown—(up to 20%)

Peripheral and Central Vertigo
Duration and
Course

Onset
Peripheral Vertigo
Sudden, often when
rolling onto the affected
side or tilting up the
head

Benign Positional
Vertigo

Additional
Features

Hearing

Tinnitus

Onset a few seconds
to <1 minute
Lasts a few weeks,
may recur

Not affected

Absent

Sometimes nausea,
vomiting, nystagmus

Vestibular
Neuronitis (Acute
Labyrinthitis)

Sudden

Onset hours to up
to 2 weeks
May recur over
12–18 months

Not affected

Absent

Nausea, vomiting,
nystagmus

Ménière Disease

Sudden

Onset several hours
to ≥1 day
Recurrent

Sensorineural
hearing loss—
recurs, eventually
progresses

Present,
ﬂuctuating

Pressure or fullness in
affected ear; nausea,
vomiting, nystagmus

Drug Toxicity

Insidious or acute—
linked to loop diuretics,
aminoglycosides,
salicylates, alcohol

May or may not
be reversible
Partial adaptation
occurs

May be impaired

May be
present

Nausea, vomiting

Acoustic Neuroma

Insidious from CN VIII
compression, vestibular
branch

Variable

Impaired, one
side

Present

May involve CN V
and VII

Central Vertigo

Often sudden (see
causes above)

Variable but rarely
continuous

Not affected

Absent

Usually with other
brainstem deﬁcits—
dysarthria, ataxia,
crossed motor and
sensory deﬁcits

Sources: Chan Y. Differential diagnosis of dizziness. Curr Opin Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2009;17:200; Kroenke K, Lucas CA, Rosengerg ML, et al. Causes of
persistent dizziness: a prospective study of 100 patients in ambulatory care. Ann Intern Med. 1992;117:898; Tusa RJ. Vertigo. Neurol Clin. 2001;19:23; Lockwood
AH, Salvi RJ, Burkard RF. Tinnitus. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:904.

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

271

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 7-5 Selected Facies
FACIAL SWELLING

Hair dry, coarse,
sparse
Periorbital
edema

Lateral
eyebrows
thin
Periorbital
edema
Puffy dull face
with dry skin

Puffy pale
face
Lips may
be swollen

Cushing Syndrome
The increased adrenal cortisol production
of Cushing syndrome produces a round or
“moon” face with red cheeks. Excessive
hair growth may be present in the
mustache, sideburn areas, and chin (as
well as the chest, abdomen, and thighs).

Nephrotic Syndrome
Glomerular disease causes excess
albumin excretion, which reduces
intravascular colloid osmotic pressure,
causing hypovolemia, then sodium
and water retention. The face becomes
edematous and often pale. Swelling
usually appears ﬁrst around the eyes
and in the morning. When severe, the
eyes appear slitlike.

Myxedema
In severe hypothyroidism (myxedema)
mucopolysaccharide deposition in the
dermis leads to a dull, puffy facies. The
edema, often pronounced around the
eyes, does not pit with pressure. The hair
and eyebrows are dry, coarse, and thinned,
classically with loss of the lateral third of
the eyebrows. The skin is dry.

OTHER FACIES
Prominent brow
Enlarged
soft tissues
Prominent
jaw

Stare

Swelling

Decreased
mobility

Parotid Gland Enlargement
Chronic bilateral asymptomatic parotid
gland enlargement may be associated with
obesity, diabetes, cirrhosis, and other
conditions. Note the swellings anterior to
the ear lobes and above the angles of the
jaw. Gradual unilateral enlargement
suggests neoplasm. Acute enlargement is
seen in mumps.

272

Acromegaly
The increased growth hormone of
acromegaly produces enlargement of
both bone and soft tissues. The head is
elongated, with bony prominence of
the forehead, nose, and lower jaw. Soft
tissues of the nose, lips, and ears also
enlarge. The facial features appear
generally coarsened.

Parkinson Disease
In this neurodegenerative disorder
linked to loss of the neurotransmitter
dopamine, there is decreased facial
mobility and a masklike facies, with
decreased blinking and a characteristic
stare. Since the neck and upper trunk
tend to ﬂex forward, the patient seems to
peer upward toward the observer. Facial
skin becomes oily, and drooling may
occur.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 7-6 Visual Field Defects
Visual Field Defects
1. Horizontal Defect Occlusion of a branch of the central
retinal artery may cause a horizontal (altitudinal) defect.
Ischemia of the optic nerve can produce a similar defect.

Temporal

Nasal

Temporal

Nasal

2. Blind Right Eye (Right Optic Nerve) A lesion of the
optic nerve and, of course, of the eye itself, produces
unilateral monocular blindness.
Right Eye

Left Eye
1
2

Optic nerve

3. Bitemporal Hemianopsia (Optic Chiasm) A lesion at
the optic chiasm (such as a pituitary tumor), may involve
only ﬁbers crossing over to the opposite side. Since these
ﬁbers originate in the nasal half of each retina, visual loss
involves the temporal half of each ﬁeld.

3
Optic chiasm
Optic tract

4

5

Optic
radiation

6

4. Left Homonymous Hemianopsia (Right Optic Tract)
A lesion of the optic tract, interrupts ﬁbers originating on the
same side of both eyes. Visual loss in the eyes is, therefore,
similar (homonymous) and involves half of each ﬁeld (hemianopsia).

5. Homonymous Left Superior Quadrantic Defect
(Right Optic Radiation, Partial) A partial lesion of the
optic radiation in the temporal lobe, may involve only a
portion of the nerve ﬁbers, producing, for example, a homonymous quadrantic (“pie in the sky”) defect.

Visual cortex

6. Left Homonymous Hemianopsia (Right Optic Radiation) A complete interruption of ﬁbers in the optic radiation,
produces a visual defect similar to that produced by a lesion of
the optic tract.

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

273

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 7-7 Variations and Abnormalities of the Eyelids
Ptosis
Ptosis is a drooping of the upper lid. Causes include myasthenia gravis,
damage to the oculomotor nerve (CN III), and damage to the sympathetic
nerve supply (Horner syndrome). A weakened muscle, relaxed tissues, and
the weight of herniated fat may cause senile ptosis. Ptosis may also be
congenital.

Entropion
Entropion, more common in the elderly, is an inward turning of the lid
margin. The lower lashes, which are often invisible when turned inward,
irritate the conjunctiva and lower cornea. Ask the patient to squeeze the
lids together and then open them; then check for an entropion that is less
obvious.

Ectropion
In ectropion, the lower lid margin turns outward, exposing the palpebral
conjunctiva. When the punctum of the lower lid turns outward, the eye no
longer drains well, and tearing occurs. Ectropion is also more common in
older adults.

Lid Retraction and Exophthalmos
A wide-eyed stare suggests retracted eyelids. Note the rim of sclera between
the upper lid and the iris. Retracted lids and “lid lag” when eyes move from
up to down markedly increase the likelihood of hyperthyroidism, especially
when accompanied by a ﬁne tremor, moist skin, and heart rate >90 beats
per minute.99
Exophthalmos describes protrusion of the eyeball, a common feature of
Graves ophthalmopathy, triggered by autoreactive T lymphocytes. In this
disorder, there is a spectrum of eye changes, ranging from lid retraction to
extraocular muscle dysfunction, dry eyes, ocular pain, and lacrimation.
Changes do not always progress. In unilateral exophthalmos, consider
Graves disease (though usually bilateral), trauma, orbital tumor, and
granulomatous disorders.94
Source of photos: Ptosis, Ectropion, Entropion—Tasman W, Jaeger E, eds. The Wills Eye Hospital Atlas of Clinical Ophthalmology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins, 2001.

274

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 7-8 Lumps and Swellings in and Around the Eyes

Pinguecula
A harmless yellowish triangular nodule in the bulbar
conjunctiva on either side of the iris. Appears frequently with
aging, ﬁrst on the nasal and then on the temporal side.

Episcleritis
A localized ocular inﬂammation of the episcleral vessels.
Vessels appear movable over the scleral surface. May be
nodular or show only redness and dilated vessels. Seen in
rheumatoid arthritis, Sjögren syndrome, and herpes zoster.

Stye (Hordeolum)
A painful, tender, red infection at the inner or outer margin of
the eyelid, usually from Staphylococcus aureus (at the inner
margin—from an obstructed meibomian gland; at the outer
margin—from an obstructed eyelash follicle or tear gland).

Chalazion
A subacute nontender, usually painless nodule caused by a
blocked meibomian gland. May become acutely inﬂamed
but, unlike a stye, usually points inside the lid rather than on
the lid margin.

Xanthelasma
Slightly raised, yellowish, well-circumscribed cholesterol-ﬁlled
plaques that appear along the nasal portions of one or both
eyelids. Half of affected patients have hyperlipidemia; it is also
common in primary biliary cirrhosis.

Blepharitis
A chronic inﬂammation of the eyelids at the base of the hair
follicles, often from S. aureus. There is also a scaling
seborrheic variant.

Source of photos: Tasman W, Jaeger E, eds. The Wills Eye Hospital Atlas of Clinical Ophthalmology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2001.

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

275

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 7-9 Opacities of the Cornea and Lens

Corneal Arcus. A thin grayish white arc or circle not quite at
the edge of the cornea. Accompanies normal aging but also seen
in younger adults, especially African Americans. In young
adults, suggests possible hyperlipoproteinemia. Usually benign.

Kayser-Fleischer Ring. A golden to red brown ring, sometimes
shading to green or blue, from copper deposition in the periphery
of the cornea found in Wilson disease. Due to a rare autosomal
recessive mutation of the ATO7B gene on chromosome 13 causing
abnormal copper transport, reduced biliary copper excretion, and
abnormal accumulation of copper in the liver and tissues
throughout the body. Patients present with liver disease, renal
failure, and neurologic symptoms of tremor, dystonia, and a variety
of psychiatric disorders.95,96

Corneal Scar. A superﬁcial grayish white opacity in the
cornea, secondary to an old injury or to inﬂammation. Size and
shape are variable. Do not confuse with the opaque lens of a
cataract, visible on a deeper plane and only through the pupil.

Pterygium. A triangular thickening of the bulbar conjunctiva that
grows slowly across the outer surface of the cornea, usually from
the nasal side. Reddening may occur. May interfere with vision as it
encroaches on the pupil.

Cataracts. Opacitiy of the lenses visible through the pupil. Risk
factors are older age, smoking, diabetes, corticosteroid use.
Nuclear Cataract. A nuclear cataract looks gray when seen by
a ﬂashlight. If the pupil is widely dilated, the gray opacity is
surrounded by a black rim.

Peripheral Cataract. Produces spokelike shadows that point—
gray against black, as seen with a ﬂashlight, or black against red
with an ophthalmoscope. A dilated pupil, as shown here, facilitates
this observation.

276

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 7-10 Pupillary Abnormalities

Unequal Pupils (Anisocoria)—Anisocoria represents a defect in the constriction or dilatation of one pupil. Constriction to light
and near effort is mediated by parasympathetic pathways, and pupillary dilatation by sympathetic pathways. The light reaction in
bright and dim light identiﬁes the abnormal pupil. When anisocoria is greater in bright light than in dim light, the larger pupil
cannot constrict properly. Causes include blunt trauma to the eye, open-angle glaucoma (p. 270), and impaired parasympathetic
innervation to the iris, as in tonic pupil and oculomotor nerve (CN III) paralysis. When anisocoria is greater in dim light, the
smaller pupil cannot dilate properly, as in Horner syndrome, caused by an interruption of the sympathetic innervation.
Assessing the near reaction is also important in determining the cause. See also Table 17-13, Pupils in Comatose Patients, p. 792.
Tonic Pupil (Adie Pupil). Pupil is large (dilated), regular, and usually
unilateral. Reaction to light is severely reduced and slowed, or even absent.
Constriction during the near vision is present, although very slow (tonic).
These changes reﬂect parasympathetic denervation. Slow accommodation
causes blurred vision.
Oculomotor Nerve (CN III) Paralysis. The pupil is large and ﬁxed to light
and near effort. Ptosis of the upper eyelid (due to impaired CN III innervation
of the levator palpebrae muscle) and lateral deviation of the eye downward
and outward are almost always present.

Horner Syndrome. The affected pupil is small, unilateral, reacts briskly to
light and near effort, but dilates slowly, especially in dim light. Anisocoria is
>1 mm, with ipsilateral ptosis of the eyelid and often loss of sweating on the
forehead. These ﬁndings reﬂect the classic triad of Horner syndrome—miosis,
ptosis and anhydrosis, due to a lesion in the sympathetic pathways anywhere
from the hypothalamus through the brachial plexus and cervical ganglia into
the oculasympathetic ﬁbers of the eye. Causes include ipsilateral brainstem
lesions, neck and chest tumors affecting the ipsilateral sympathetic ganglia,
and orbital trauma or migraines.100 In congenital Horner syndrome, the
involved iris is lighter in color than its fellow (heterochromia).
Small, Irregular Pupils (Argyll Robertson Pupils). The pupils are small,
irregular and usually bilateral. They constrict with near vision and dilate with
far vision (a normal near reaction) but do not react to light, seen in
neurosyphilis and rarely in diabetes.

Equal Pupils and One Blind Eye. Unilateral blindness does not cause anisocoria as long as the sympathetic and
parasympathetic innervation to both irises is normal. A light directed into the seeing eye produces a direct reaction in that eye
and a consensual reaction in the blind eye. A light directed into the blind eye, however, causes no response in either eye.
Blind eye

Blind eye

Light

Light

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

277

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 7-11 Dysconjugate Gaze

There are a number of abnormal patterns of gaze related to developmental disorders and cranial nerve abnormalities.
Developmental Disorders
Developmental dysconjugate gaze is caused by an imbalance in
ocular muscle tone. This imbalance has many causes, may be
hereditary, and usually appears in early childhood. These gaze
deviations are classiﬁed according to direction:

Disorders of Cranial Nerves
New onset of dysconjugate gaze in adults usually results
from cranial nerve injuries, lesions, or abnormalities from
causes such as trauma, multiple sclerosis, syphilis, and
others.

Esotropia

A Left Cranial Nerve VI Paralysis

Exotropia

LOOKING TO THE RIGHT

Eyes are conjugate.

Cover–Uncover Test
A cover–uncover test may be helpful. Here is what you would see in the right monocular esotropia illustrated above.
LOOKING STRAIGHT AHEAD

Corneal reﬂections are
asymmetric.

COVER

Esotropia appears.

LOOKING TO THE RIGHT

The right eye moves outward
to ﬁx on the light. (The left
eye is not seen but moves
inward to the same degree.)

Esotropia is
maximum.
A Left Cranial Nerve IV
Paralysis

UNCOVER
The left eye moves outward
to ﬁx on the light. The right
eye deviates inward again.

LOOKING DOWN AND TO THE RIGHT

The left eye cannot
look down when
turned inward.
Deviation is
maximum in this
direction.
A Left Cranial Nerve III
Paralysis
LOOKING STRAIGHT AHEAD

278

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

The eye is pulled
outward by action of
the CN VI. Upward,
downward, and
inward movements
are impaired or lost.
Ptosis and pupillary
dilation may be
associated.

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 7-12 Normal Variations of the Optic Disc
Physiologic Cupping

Temporal cup

Central cup

The physiologic cup is a small whitish depression in the optic disc, the entry point for the retinal vessels. Although sometimes
absent, the cup is usually visible either centrally or toward the temporal side of the disc. Grayish spots are often seen at its base.

Rings and Crescents

Medullated Nerve Fibers

Rings and crescents are often seen around the optic disc.
These are developmental variations that appear as either
white sclera, black retinal pigment, or both, especially along
the temporal border of the disc. Rings and crescents are not
part of the disc itself and should not be included in your
estimate of the disc diameter.

Medullated or myelinated nerve ﬁbers are a much less common
but dramatic ﬁnding. Appearing as irregular white patches with
feathered margins, they obscure the disc edge and retinal
vessels. They have no pathologic signiﬁcance.

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

279

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 7-13 Abnormalities of the Optic Disc
Normal

Papilledema

Process
Tiny disc vessels give normal color to the disc.

Process
Elevated intracranial pressure causes intraaxonal edema along the
optic nerve, leading to engorgement and swelling of the optic disc.

Appearance
Color yellowish orange to creamy pink
Disc vessels tiny
Disc margins sharp (except perhaps nasally)
The physiologic cup is located centrally or somewhat
temporally. It may be conspicuous or absent. Its
diameter from side to side is usually less than half that
of the disc.

Appearance
Color pink, hyperemic
Often with loss of venous pulsations
Disc vessels more visible, more numerous, curve over the borders
of the disc
Disc swollen with margins blurred
The physiologic cup is not visible.
Seen in intracranial mass, lesion, or hemorrhage, meningitis

Glaucomatous Cupping

Optic Atrophy

Process
Increased intraocular pressure within the eye leads to
increased cupping (backward depression of the disc) and
atrophy. The base of the enlarged cup is pale.

Process
The physiologic cup is enlarged, occupying more than half of the
disc’s diameter, at times extending to the edge of the disc. Retinal
vessels sink in and under the cup, and may be displaced nasally.

Appearance
Death of optic nerve ﬁbers leads to loss of the tiny disc
vessels.

Appearance
Color white
Tiny disc vessels absent
Seen in optic neuritis, multiple sclerosis, temporal arteritis

Sources of photos for Normal—Tasman W, Jaeger E, eds. The Wills Eye Hospital Atlas of Clinical Ophthalmology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins, 2001; Papilledema, Glaucomatous Cupping, Optic Atrophy—Courtesy of Ken Freedman, MD.

280

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 7-14 Retinal
Arteries and Arteriovenous

Crossings: Normal and Hypertensive

Normal Retinal Artery and Arteriovenous (AV) Crossing
The normal arterial wall is transparent; usually only the column of
Arterial wall (invisible)
blood is visible. The normal light reﬂex is narrow—about oneColumn of blood
fourth the diameter of the blood column. Because the arterial wall is
transparent, a vein crossing beneath the artery appears right up to
Light reflex
the column of blood on either side.
Retinal Arteries in Hypertension

Vein
Arterial wall
Artery

Copper Wiring

Silver Wiring

Sometimes the arteries, especially
those close to the disc, become full
and somewhat tortuous and
develop an increased light reﬂex
with a bright coppery luster, called
copper wiring.

Occasionally the wall of a narrowed
artery becomes opaque so there is no
visible blood, called silver wiring.

Narrowed column
of blood
Focal
narrowing

Narrowed light
reflex

In hypertension, increased pressure damages the
vascular endothelium, leading to deposition of
plasma macromolecules and thickening of the
arterial wall, causing focal or generalized
narrowing of the lumen and the light reﬂex.

AV Crossing
When the arterial walls lose their transparency, changes appear in the arteriovenous crossings. Decreased transparency of the
retina probably also contributes to the ﬁrst two changes shown below.

Concealment or AV Nicking. The
vein appears to stop abruptly on either
side of the artery.

Tapering. The vein appears to taper
down on either side of the artery.

Banking. The vein is twisted on the
distal side of the artery and forms a dark,
wide knuckle

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

281

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 7-15 Red Spots and Streaks in the Fundi

O

F

Superﬁcial Retinal Hemorrhages. Small, linear, ﬂame-shaped, red streaks in the fundi, shaped by the superﬁcial bundles
of nerve ﬁbers that radiate from the optic disc in the pattern illustrated (O = optic disc; F = fovea). Sometimes the hemorrhages
occur in clusters and look like a larger hemorrhage but can be identiﬁed by the linear streaking at the edges. These hemorrhages
are seen in severe hypertension, papilledema, and occlusion of the retinal vein, among other conditions. An occasional superﬁcial
hemorrhage has a white center consisting of ﬁbrin, which has many causes.

Preretinal Hemorrhage. Develops when blood escapes into
the potential space between the retina and vitreous. This hemorrhage is typically larger than retinal hemorrhages. Because it is
anterior to the retina, it obscures any underlying retinal vessels.
In an erect patient, red cells settle, creating a horizontal line of
demarcation between plasma above and cells below. Causes
include a sudden increase in intracranial pressure.

Deep Retinal Hemorrhages. Small, rounded, slightly
irregular red spots that are sometimes called dot or blot
hemorrhages. They occur in a deeper layer of the retina than
ﬂame-shaped hemorrhages. Diabetes is a common cause.

Microaneurysms. Tiny, round, red spots commonly seen in
and around the macular area. They are minute dilatations of
very small retinal vessels; the vascular connections are too small
to be seen with an ophthalmoscope. A hallmark of diabetic retinopathy.

Neovascularization. Refers to the formation of new blood
vessels. They are more numerous, more tortuous, and narrower than neighboring blood vessels in the area and form
disorderly looking red arcades. A common feature of the proliferative stage of diabetic retinopathy. The vessels may grow
into the vitreous, where retinal detachment or hemorrhage
may cause loss of vision.

Source of photos: Tasman W, Jaeger E, eds. The Wills Eye Hospital Atlas of Clinical Ophthalmology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2001.

282

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 7-16 Ocular Fundi: Normal and Hypertensive Retinopathy

Normal Fundus of a Light-Skinned Person
Inspect the optic disc. Follow the major vessels in four
directions, noting their relative sizes and any arteriovenous
crossings—both are normal here. Inspect the macular area. The
slightly darker fovea is just discernible; no light reﬂex is visible
in this subject. Look for any lesions in the retina. Note the
striped, or tessellated, character of the fundus, especially in the
lower ﬁeld, that comes from normal underlying choroidal
vessels. The fundus of a light-skinned person with brunette
coloring is redder.

Normal Fundus of a Dark-Skinned Person
Again, inspect the disc, vessels, macula, and retina. The ring
around the fovea is a normal light reﬂection. The color of the
fundus has a grayish brown, almost purplish cast, which
comes from pigment in the retina and the choroid that
characteristically obscures the choroidal vessels; no
tessellation is visible.

Hypertensive Retinopathy
Marked arteriolar-venous crossing changes are seen, especially
along the inferior vessels. Copper wiring of the arterioles is
present. A cotton-wool spot is seen just superior to the disc.
Incidental disc drusen are also present but are unrelated to
hypertension.

Hypertensive Retinopathy with Macular Star
Note the punctate exudates are readily visible: some are
scattered; others radiate from the fovea to form a macular star.
Note the two small, soft exudates about 1 disc diameter from
the disc. Find the ﬂame-shaped hemorrhages sweeping
toward 7, 8, and 10 o’clock; a few more may be seen toward
10 o’clock. These two fundi show changes typical of severe
hypertensive retinopathy, which is often accompanied by
papilledema (p. 241).

Source of photos: Hypertensive Retinopathy, Hypertensive Retinopathy with Macular Star—Tasman W, Jaeger E, eds. The Wills Eye Hospital Atlas of Clinical
Ophthalmology. 2nd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2001.
Source: Wong TY, Mitchell P. Hypertensive retinopathy. N Engl J Med. 2004;351:2310.

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

283

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 7-17 Ocular Fundi: Diabetic Retinopathy
Diabetic Retinopathy
Study carefully the fundi in the series of photographs below. They represent a national standard used by ophthalmologists to
assess diabetic retinopathy.97, 98
Nonproliferative Retinopathy, Moderately Severe
Note tiny red dots or microaneurysms. Note also the ring of hard exudates
(white spots) located superotemporally. Retinal thickening or edema in the
area of the hard exudates can impair visual acuity if it extends into the center
of the macula. Detection requires specialized stereoscopic examination.

Nonproliferative Retinopathy, Severe
In the superior temporal quadrant, note the large retinal hemorrhage
between two cotton-wool patches, beading of the retinal vein just above
them, and tiny tortuous retinal vessels above the superior temporal artery.

Proliferative Retinopathy, with Neovascularization
Note new preretinal vessels arising on the disc and extending across the disc
margins. Visual acuity is still normal, but the risk for visual loss is high.
Photocoagulation reduces this risk by >50%.

Proliferative Retinopathy, Advanced
This is the same eye, but 2 years later and without treatment.
Neovascularization has increased, now with ﬁbrous proliferations, distortion
of the macula, and reduced visual acuity.

Source of photos: Nonproliferative Retinopathy, Moderately Severe; Proliferative Retinopathy, With Neovascularization; Nonproliferative Retinopathy, Severe; Proliferative
Retinopathy, Advanced—Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study Research Group. Courtesy of MF Davis, MD, University of Wisconsin, Madison.
Source: Frank RB. Diabetic retinopathy. N Engl J Med. 2004;350:48.

284

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 7-18 Light-Colored Spots in the Fundi

Soft Exudates: Cotton-Wool Patches
Cotton-wool patches are white or grayish, ovoid lesions with
irregular “soft” borders. They are moderate in size but usually
smaller than the disc. They result from extruded axoplasm
from retinal ganglion cells caused by microinfarcts of the retinal
nerve ﬁber layer. Seen in hypertension, diabetes, HIV and other
viruses, and numerous other conditions.

Hard Exudates
Hard exudates are creamy or yellowish, often bright, lesions
with well-deﬁned “hard” borders. They are small and round
but may coalesce into larger irregular spots. They often occur
in clusters or in circular, linear, or star-shaped patterns. They
are lipid residues of serous leakage from damaged capillaries.
Causes include diabetes and vascular dysplasias.

Drusen
Drusen are yellowish round spots that vary from tiny to small.
The edges may be soft, as here, or hard (p. 242). They are
haphazardly distributed but may concentrate at the posterior
pole between the optic disc and the macula. Drusen consist of
dead retinal pigment epithelial cells. Seen in normal aging and
age-related macular degeneration.

Healed Chorioretinitis
Here inﬂammation has destroyed the superﬁcial tissues to
reveal a well-deﬁned, irregular patch of white sclera marked
with dark pigment. Size varies from small to very large.
Toxoplasmosis is illustrated. Multiple, small, somewhat similarlooking areas may be due to laser treatments. Here there is
also a temporal scar near the macula.

Source of photos: Cotton-Wool Patches, Drusen, Healed Chorioretinitis—Tasman W, Jaeger E, eds. The Wills Eye Hospital Atlas of Clinical Ophthalmology. 2nd ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2001; Hard Exudates—Courtesy of Ken Freedman, MD. American Academy of Ophthalmology. Optic fundus
signs. At http://www.aao.org/theeyeshaveit/optic-fundus/index.cfm. Accessed March 23, 2015.

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

285

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 7-19 Lumps on or Near the Ear
Keloid. A ﬁrm, nodular,
hypertrophic mass of scar
tissue extending beyond the
area of injury. It may develop in any scarred area but
is most common on the
shoulders and upper chest.
A keloid on a pierced earlobe may have unwanted
cosmetic effects. Keloids are
more common in darkerskinned people and may
recur following treatment.

Chondrodermatitis
Helicis. This chronic inﬂammatory lesion starts as a painful, tender papule on the helix
or antihelix. Here the upper lesion is at a later stage of ulceration and crusting. Reddening
may occur. Biopsy is needed to
rule out carcinoma.

Tophi. A deposit of uric acid
crystals characteristic of
chronic tophaceous gout. It
appears as hard nodules in
the helix or antihelix and
may discharge chalky white
crystals through the skin. It
also may appear near the
joints, hands (p. 703), feet,
and other areas. It usually develops after chronic sustained
high blood levels of uric acid.

Basal Cell Carcinoma.
This raised nodule shows the
lustrous surface and telangiectatic vessels of basal cell carcinoma, a common
slow-growing malignancy that
rarely metastasizes. Growth
and ulceration may occur.
These are more frequent in
fair-skinned people overexposed to sunlight.

Cutaneous Cyst. Formerly called a sebaceous cyst,
a dome-shaped lump in the
dermis forms a benign closed
ﬁrm sac attached to the epidermis. A dark dot (blackhead) may be visible on its
surface. Histologically, it is
usually either (1) an epidermoid cyst, common on the
face and neck, or (2) a pilar
(trichilemmal) cyst, common
in the scalp. Both may become inﬂamed.

Rheumatoid Nodules. In
chronic rheumatoid arthritis,
look for small lumps on the
helix or antihelix and additional nodules elsewhere on
the hands and along the surface of the ulna distal to the
elbow (p. 702), and on the
knees and heels. Ulceration
may result from repeated injuries. These nodules may antedate the arthritis.

Sources of photos: Keloid—Sams WM Jr, Lynch PJ, eds. Principles and Practice of Dermatology. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1990; Tophi—du Vivier A. Atlas of
Clinical Dermatology. 2nd ed. London, UK: Gower Medical Publishing, 1993; Cutaneous Cyst, Chondrodermatitis Helicis—Young EM, Newcomer VD, Kligman AM.
Geriatric Dermatology: Color Atlas and Practitioner’s Guide. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger, 1993; Basal Cell Carcinoma—Phillips T, Dover J. Recent Advances in
Dermatology. N Engl J Med. 326:169–170, 1992; Rheumatoid Nodules—Champion RH, Burton JL, Ebling FJG, eds. Rook/Wilkinson/Ebling Textbook of Dermatology.
5th ed. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Scientiﬁc, 1992.

286

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 7-20 Abnormalities of the Eardrum

Normal Eardrum (Right)
This normal right eardrum the tympanic membrane, is pinkish gray. Note the
malleus lying behind the upper part of the drum. Above the short process lies the
pars ﬂaccida. The remainder of the drum is the pars tensa. From the umbo, the
bright cone of light fans anteriorly and downward. Posterior to the malleus, part
of the incus is visible behind the drum. The small blood vessels along the handle
of the malleus are normal.

Perforation of the Eardrum
Perforations are holes in the eardrum, usually from purulent infections of the
middle ear. They may be central, if not involving the margin of the drum, or
marginal, when the margin is involved. The membrane covering the perforation
may be notably thin and transparent.
The more common central perforation is illustrated here. A reddened ring of
granulation tissue surrounds the perforation, indicating chronic infection. The
eardrum itself is scarred, and no landmarks are visible. Discharge from the
infected middle ear may drain out through the perforated opening, which often
closes in the healing process, as in the next photo. There may be associated
earache or even hearing loss, especially if the perforations are large.

Tympanosclerosis
Tympanosclerosis is a scarring process of the middle ear from otitis media that
involves deposition of hyaline and calcium and phosphate crystals in the eardrum
and middle ear. When severe it may entrap the ossicles and cause conductive
hearing loss.
In the inferior portion of this left eardrum, note the large, chalky white patch with
irregular margins. It is typical of tympanosclerosis: a deposition of hyaline
material within the layers of the tympanic membrane that sometimes follows a
severe episode of otitis media. It does not usually impair hearing and is seldom
clinically signiﬁcant.
Other abnormalities in this eardrum include a healed perforation (the large oval
area in the upper posterior drum) and signs of a retracted drum. A retracted drum
is pulled medially, away from the examiner’s eye, and the malleolar folds are
tightened into sharp outlines. The short process often protrudes sharply, and the
handle of the malleus, pulled inward at the umbo, looks foreshortened and more
horizontal.
Sources of photos: Normal Eardrum—Hawke M, Keene M, Alberti PW. Clinical Otoscopy: A Text and Colour Atlas. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1984;
Perforation of the Drum, Tympanosclerosis—Courtesy of Michael Hawke, MD, Toronto, Canada.

(continued)

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

287

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 7-20 Abnormalities of the Eardrum (Continued )
Serous Effusion
Serous effusions are usually caused by viral upper respiratory infections (otitis
media with serous effusion) or by sudden changes in atmospheric pressure as from
ﬂying or diving (otitic barotrauma). The eustachian tube cannot equalize the air
pressure in the middle ear and outside air. Air is absorbed from the middle ear
into the bloodstream, and serous ﬂuid accumulates in the middle ear instead.
Symptoms include fullness and popping sensations in the ear, mild conduction
hearing loss, and, sometimes, pain.
Amber ﬂuid behind the eardrum is characteristic, as in this patient with otitic
barotrauma. A ﬂuid level, a line between air above and amber ﬂuid below, can be
seen on either side of the short process. Air bubbles (not always present) can be
seen here within the amber ﬂuid.

Acute Otitis Media with Purulent Effusion
Acute otitis media with purulent effusion is commonly caused by bacterial infection
from S. pneumoniae or H. inﬂuenzae. Symptoms include earache, fever, and hearing
loss. The eardrum reddens, loses its landmarks, and bulges laterally, toward the
examiner’s eye.
Here the eardrum is bulging, and most landmarks are obscured. Redness is most
obvious near the umbo, but dilated vessels can be seen in all segments of the
drum. A diffuse redness of the entire drum often develops. Spontaneous rupture
(perforation) of the drum may follow, with discharge of purulent material into the
ear canal.
Hearing loss is the conductive type. Acute purulent otitis media is much more
common in children than in adults.

Bullous Myringitis
In bullous myringitis, painful hemorrhagic vesicles appear on the tympanic
membrane, the ear canal, or both. Symptoms include earache, blood-tinged
discharge from the ear, and conductive hearing loss.
In this right ear, at least two large vesicles (bullae) are discernible on the drum.
The drum is reddened, and its landmarks are obscured.
This condition is caused by mycoplasma, viral, and bacterial otitis media.

Sources of photos: Serous Effusion—Hawke M, Keene M, Alberti PW. Clinical Otoscopy: A Text and Colour Atlas. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 1984; Acute Otitis
Media, Bullous Myringitis—The Wellcome Trust, National Medical Slide Bank, London, UK.

288

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 7-21 Patterns of Hearing Loss
Conductive Loss

Sensorineural Loss
Tympanic membrane

Tympanic membrane

Middle ear

Middle ear

Cochlear
nerve

Cochlear
nerve

Pathophysiology

External or middle ear disorder impairs sound
conduction to inner ear. Causes include foreign
body, otitis media, perforated eardrum, and
otosclerosis of ossicles.

Inner ear disorder involves cochlear nerve and
neuronal impulse transmission to the brain. Causes
include loud noise exposure, inner ear infections,
trauma, acoustic neuroma, congenital and familial
disorders, and aging.

Usual Age of
Onset

Childhood and young adulthood, up to age
40 years

Middle or later years

Ear Canal and
Drum

Abnormality usually visible, except in otosclerosis

Problem not visible

Effects

Little effect on sound
Hearing seems to improve in noisy environment
Voice remains soft because inner ear and cochlear
nerve are intact

Higher registers are lost, so sound may be distorted
Hearing worsens in noisy environment
Voice may be loud because hearing is difﬁcult

Weber Test
(in Unilateral
Hearing Loss)

Tuning fork at vertex
Sound lateralizes to impaired ear—room noise not
well heard, so detection of vibrations improves.

Tuning fork at vertex
Sound lateralizes to good ear—inner ear or cochlear
nerve damage impairs transmission to affected ear.

Rinne Test

Tuning fork at external auditory meatus; then on
mastoid bone
BC longer than or equal to AC (BC ≥ AC). While
air conduction through the external or middle ear
is impaired, vibrations through bone bypass the
problem to reach the cochlea.

Tuning fork at external auditory meatus; then on
mastoid bone
AC longer than BC (AC > BC). The inner ear or
cochlear nerve is less able to transmit impulses
regardless of how the vibrations reach the cochlea.
The normal pattern prevails.

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

289

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 7-22 Abnormalities of the Lips

Angular Cheilitis
Angular cheilitis starts with softening of the skin at the angles of the mouth,
followed by ﬁssuring. It may be due to nutritional deﬁciency or, more
commonly, to overclosure of the mouth, seen in people with no teeth or with
ill-ﬁtting dentures. Saliva wets and macerates the infolded skin, often leading
to secondary infection with Candida, as seen here.

Actinic Cheilitis
Actinic cheilitis is a precancerous condition that results from excessive
exposure to sunlight and affects primarily the lower lip. Fair-skinned men
who work outdoors are most often affected. The lip loses its normal redness
and may become scaly, somewhat thickened, and slightly everted. Solar
damage predisposes to squamous cell carcinoma of the lip, so examine these
skin lesions carefully.

Herpes Simplex (Cold Sore, Fever Blister)
The herpes simplex virus (HSV) produces recurrent and painful vesicular
eruptions of the lips and surrounding skin. A small cluster of vesicles ﬁrst
develops. As these break, yellow-brown crusts form. Healing takes 10 to 14
days. Both new and erupted vesicles are visible here.

Angioedema
Angioedema is a localized subcutaneous or submucosal swelling caused by
leakage of intravascular ﬂuid into interstitial tissue. Two types are common.
When vascular permeability is triggered by mast cells in allergic and NSAID
reactions, look for associated urticaria and pruritus. These are uncommon in
angioedema from bradykinin and complement-derived mediators, the
mechanism in ACE-inhibitor reactions. Angioedema is usually benign and
resolves within 24 to 48 hours. It can be life threatening when it involves the
larynx, tongue, or upper airway or develops into anaphylaxis.

Sources of photos: Angular Cheilitis, Herpes Simplex, Angioedema—Neville B, et al. Color Atlas of Clinical Oral Pathology. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger, 1991; Used
with permission; Actinic Cheilitis—Langlais RP, Miller CS. Color Atlas of Common Oral Diseases. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger, 1992. Used with permission.

290

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia
(Osler-Weber-Rendu syndrome)
Multiple small red spots on the lips strongly suggest hereditary hemorrhagic
telangiectasia, an autosomal dominant endothelial disorder causing vascular
fragility and arteriovascular malformations (AVMs). Telangiectasias are also
visible on the oral mucosa, nasal septal mucosa, and ﬁngertips. Nosebleeds,
gastrointestinal bleeding, and iron deﬁciency anemia are common. AVMs in
the lungs and brain can cause life-threatening hemorrhage and embolic
disease.

Peutz–Jeghers Syndrome
Look for prominent small brown pigmented spots in the dermal layer of the
lips, buccal mucosa, and perioral area. These spots may also appear on the
hands and feet. In this autosomal dominant syndrome, these characteristic
skin changes accompany numerous intestinal polyps. The risk of
gastrointestinal and other cancers ranges from 40% to 90%. Note that these
spots rarely appear around the nose and mouth.

Chancre of Primary Syphilis
This ulcerated papule with an indurated edge usually appears after 3 to 6
weeks of incubating infection from the spirochete Treponema pallidum. These
lesions may resemble a carcinoma or crusted cold sore. Similar primary
lesions are common in the pharynx, anus, and vagina but may escape
detection since they are painless, nonsuppurative, and usually heal
spontaneously in 3 to 6 weeks. Wear gloves during palpation since these
chancres are infectious.
Carcinoma of the Lip
Like actinic cheilitis, squamous cell carcinoma usually affects the lower lip. It
may appear as a scaly plaque, as an ulcer with or without a crust, or as a
nodular lesion, as illustrated here. Fair skin and prolonged exposure to the
sun are common risk factors.

Sources of photos: Hereditary Hemorrhagic Telangiectasia—Langlais RP, Miller CS. Color Atlas of Common Oral Diseases. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger, 1992; Used
with permission; Peutz-Jeghers Syndrome—Robinson HBG, Miller AS. Colby, Kerr, and Robinson’s Color Atlas of Oral Pathology. Philadelphia, PA: JB Lippincott, 1990;
Chancre of Syphilis—Wisdom A. A Colour Atlas of Sexually Transmitted Diseases. 2nd ed. London: Wolfe Medical Publications, 1989; Carcinoma of the Lip—Tyldesley
WR. A Colour Atlas of Orofacial Diseases. 2nd ed. London: Wolfe Medical Publications, 1991.

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

291

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 7-23 Findings
in the Pharynx, Palate, and
Oral Mucosa

Large Normal Tonsils
Normal tonsils may be large without being infected, especially in children.
They may protrude medially beyond the pillars and even to the midline. Here
they touch the sides of the uvula and obscure the pharynx. Their color is
pink. The white marks are light reﬂections, not exudate.

Exudative Tonsillitis
This red throat has a white exudate on the tonsils. This, together with fever
and enlarged cervical nodes, increases the probability of group A streptococcal
infection or infectious mononucleosis. Anterior cervical lymph nodes are usually
enlarged in the former, posterior nodes in the latter.

Pharyngitis
These two photos show reddened throats without exudate.
In A, redness and vascularity of the pillars and uvula are mild to moderate.

A

In B, redness is diffuse and intense. Each patient would probably complain of
a sore throat, or at least a scratchy one. Causes are both viral and bacterial. If
the patient has no fever, exudate, or enlargement of cervical lymph nodes, the
chances of infection by either of two common causes—Group A streptococci
and Epstein-Barr virus (infectious mononucleosis)—are reduced.

B
Sources of photos: Large Normal Tonsils, Exudative Tonsillitis, Pharyngitis [A and B]—The Wellcome Trust, National Medical Slide Bank, London, UK.

292

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Diphtheria
Diphtheria, an acute infection caused by Corynebacterium diphtheriae, is now
rare but still important. Prompt diagnosis may lead to life-saving treatment.
The throat is dull red, and a gray exudate (pseudomembrane) is present on
the uvula, pharynx, and tongue. The airway may become obstructed. Prompt
diagnosis may lead to life-saving treatment.

Thrush on the Palate (Candidiasis)
Thrush is a yeast infection from Candida species. Shown here on the palate, it
may appear elsewhere in the mouth (see p. 297). Thick, white plaques are
somewhat adherent to the underlying mucosa. Predisposing factors include
(1) prolonged treatment with antibiotics or corticosteroids and (2) AIDS.

Kaposi Sarcoma in AIDS
The deep purple color of these lesions suggests Kaposi sarcoma, a low-grade
vascular tumor associated with human herpesvirus 8. The lesions may be
raised or ﬂat. About a third of patients with Kaposi sarcoma have lesions in
the oral cavity; other affected sites are the gastrointestinal tract and the lungs.
Antiretroviral therapy has markedly reduced the prevalence of this disease.

Torus Palatinus
A torus palatinus is a midline bony growth in the hard palate that is fairly
common in adults. Its size and lobulation vary. Although alarming at ﬁrst
glance, it is harmless. In this example, an upper denture has been ﬁtted
around the torus.

Sources of photos: Diphtheria—Harnisch JP, et al. Diphtheria among alcoholic urban adults. Ann Intern Med. 1989;111:77; Thrush on the Palate—The Wellcome
Trust, National Medical Slide Bank, London, UK; Kaposi’s Sarcoma in AIDS—Ioachim HL. Textbook and Atlas of Disease Associated with Acquired Immune Deﬁciency
Syndrome. London: Gower Medical Publishing, 1989.

(continued)

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

293

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 7-23 Findings
in the Pharynx, Palate, and
Oral Mucosa (Continued )

Fordyce Spots (Fordyce Granules)
Fordyce spots are normal sebaceous glands that appear as small yellowish
spots in the buccal mucosa or on the lips. Here they are seen best anterior to
the tongue and lower jaw. These spots are usually not numerous.

Koplik Spots
Koplik spots are an early sign of measles (rubeola). Search for small white
specks that resemble grains of salt on a red background. They usually
appear on the buccal mucosa near the ﬁrst and second molars. In this
photo, look also in the upper third of the mucosa. The rash of measles
appears within a day.

Petechiae
Petechiae are small red spots caused by blood that escapes from capillaries into
the tissues. Petechiae in the buccal mucosa, as shown, are often caused by
accidentally biting the cheek. Oral petechiae may be due to infection or
decreased platelets, and trauma.

Leukoplakia
A thickened white patch (leukoplakia) may occur anywhere in the oral
mucosa. The extensive example shown on this buccal mucosa resulted from
frequent chewing of tobacco, a local irritant. This benign reactive process of
the squamous epithelium may lead to cancer and should be biopsied. Another
risk factor is human papillomavirus infection.

Sources of photos: Fordyce Spots—Neville B, et al. Color Atlas of Clinical Oral Pathology. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger, 1991; Used with permission; Koplik
Spots—Harvey RA, Cornelissen CN. Microbiology, 3rd ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2013; Petechiae—The Wellcome Trust, National Medical
Slide Bank, London, UK; Leukoplakia—Robinson HBG, Miller AS. Colby, Kerr, and Robinson’s Color Atlas of Oral Pathology. Philadelphia, PA: JB Lippincott, 1990.

294

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 7-24 Findings in the Gums and Teeth

Marginal Gingivitis
Marginal gingivitis is common during adolescence, early adulthood, and
pregnancy. The gingival margins are reddened and swollen, and the
interdental papillae are blunted, swollen, and red. Brushing the teeth often
makes the gums bleed. Plaque—the soft white ﬁlm of salivary salts, protein,
and bacteria that covers the teeth and leads to gingivitis—is not readily
visible.

Acute Necrotizing Ulcerative Gingivitis
This uncommon form of gingivitis occurs suddenly in adolescents and young
adults and is accompanied by fever, malaise, and enlarged lymph nodes.
Ulcers develop in the interdental papillae. Then the destructive (necrotizing)
process spreads along the gum margins, where a grayish pseudomembrane
develops. The red, painful gums bleed easily; the breath is foul.

Gingival Hyperplasia
Gums enlarged by hyperplasia are swollen into heaped-up masses that may
even cover the teeth. The redness of inﬂammation may coexist, as in this
example. Causes include phenytoin therapy (as in this case), puberty,
pregnancy, and leukemia.

Pregnancy Tumor (Pregnancy Epulis or
Pyogenic Granuloma)
Red purple papules of granulation tissue form in the gingival interdental
papillae, in the nasal cavity, and sometimes on the ﬁngers. They are red, soft,
painless, and usually bleed easily. They occur in 1% to 5% of pregnancies
and usually regress after delivery. Note the accompanying gingivitis.

Sources of photos: Marginal Gingivitis, Acute Necrotizing Ulcerative Gingivitis—Tyldesley WR. A Colour Atlas of Orofacial Diseases. 2nd ed. London: Wolfe Medical
Publications, 1991; Gingival Hyperplasia—Courtesy of Dr. James Cottone; Pregnancy Tumor—Langlais RP, Miller CS. Color Atlas of Common Oral Diseases.
Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger, 1992. Used with permission.

(continued)

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

295

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 7-24 Findings in the Gums and Teeth (Continued )
Attrition of Teeth; Recession of Gums
In many elderly people, the chewing surfaces of the teeth are worn down by
repetitive use so that the yellow-brown dentin becomes exposed—a process
called attrition. Note also the recession of the gums, which has exposed the
roots of the teeth, giving a “long in the tooth” appearance.

Erosion of Teeth
Teeth may be eroded by chemical action. Note here the erosion of the enamel
from the lingual surfaces of the upper incisors, exposing the yellow-brown
dentin. This results from recurrent regurgitation of stomach contents, as in
bulimia.

Abrasion of Teeth with Notching
The biting surface of the teeth may become abraded or notched by recurrent
trauma, such as holding nails or opening bobby pins between the teeth.
Unlike Hutchinson teeth, the sides of these teeth show normal contours; size
and spacing of the teeth are unaffected.

Hutchinson Teeth in Congenital Syphilis
Hutchinson teeth are smaller and more widely spaced than normal and are
notched on their biting surfaces. The sides of the teeth taper toward the
biting edges. The upper central incisors of the permanent (not the deciduous)
teeth are most often affected. These teeth are a sign of congenital syphilis.

Sources of photos: Attrition of Teeth, Erosion of Teeth—Langlais RP, Miller CS. Color Atlas of Common Oral Diseases. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger, 1992. Used with
permission; Abrasion of Teeth, Hutchinson Teeth—Robinson HBG, Miller AS. Colby, Kerr, and Robinson’s Color Atlas of Oral Pathology. Philadelphia, PA: JB Lippincott,
1990.

296

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 7-25 Findings in or Under the Tongue

Geographic Tongue. In this benign condition, the dorsum
shows scattered smooth red areas denuded of papillae. Together
with the normal rough and coated areas, they give a maplike
pattern that changes over time.

Black Hairy Tongue. Note the “hairy” yellowish to brown
and black hypertrophied and elongated papillae on the
tongue’s dorsum. This benign condition is associated with
Candida and bacterial overgrowth, antibiotic therapy, and
poor dental hygiene. It also may occur spontaneously.

Fissured Tongue. Fissures appear with increasing age,
sometimes termed furrowed tongue. Food debris may accumulate in the crevices and become irritating, but a ﬁssured tongue
is benign.

Smooth Tongue (Atrophic Glossitis). A smooth and
often sore tongue that has lost its papillae, sometimes just in
patches, suggests a deﬁciency in riboﬂavin, niacin, folic acid,
vitamin B12, pyridoxine, or iron, or treatment with chemotherapy.

Candidiasis. Note the thick white coating from Candida infection. The raw red surface is where the coat was scraped off.
Infection may also occur without the white coating. It is seen
in immunosuppression from chemotherapy or prednisone
therapy.

Oral Hairy Leukoplakia. These whitish raised asymptomatic plaques with a feathery or corrugated pattern occur
most often on the sides of the tongue. Unlike candidiasis,
these areas cannot be scraped off. This condition is caused
by Epstein-Barr virus infection and is seen in HIV and AIDS
infection.
(continued)

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

297

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 7-25 Findings in or Under the Tongue (Continued )

Varicose Veins. Small purplish or blue-black round swellings appear under the tongue with age. These dilatations of the
lingual veins have no clinical signiﬁcance.

Aphthous Ulcer (Canker Sore). A painful, shallow
whitish-gray oval ulceration surrounded by a halo of reddened mucosa. It may be single or multiple and may also
occur on the gingiva and oral mucosa. It heals in 7–10 days,
but may recur, as in Bechet disease.

Mucous Patch of Syphilis. This painless lesion of secondary syphilis is highly infectious. It is slightly raised, oval, and
covered by a grayish membrane. It may be multiple and occur
elsewhere in the mouth.

Leukoplakia. With this persisting painless white patch in
the oral mucosa, the undersurface of the tongue appears
painted white. Patches of any size raise the possibility of squamous cell carcinoma and require biopsy.

Tori Mandibulares. Rounded bony growths on the inner
surfaces of the mandible are typically bilateral, asymptomatic,
and harmless.

Carcinoma, Floor of the Mouth. This ulcerated lesion
is in a common location for carcinoma. Medially, note the reddened area of mucosa, called erythroplakia, that is suspicious
for malignancy and should be biopsied.

Sources of photos: Fissured Tongue, Candidiasis, Mucous Patch, Leukoplakia, Carcinoma—Robinson HBG, Miller AS. Colby, Kerr, and Robinson’s Color Atlas of Oral
Pathology. Philadelphia, PA: JB Lippincott, 1990; Smooth Tongue—Courtesy of Dr. R. A. Cawson, from Cawson RA. Oral Pathology, 1st ed. London: Gower Medical
Publishing, 1987; Geographic Tongue—The Wellcome Trust, National Medical Slide Bank, London, UK; Hairy Leukoplakia—Ioachim HL. Textbook and Atlas of
Disease Associated With Acquired Immune Deﬁciency Syndrome. London: Gower Medical Publishing, 1989; Varicose Veins—Neville B, et al. Color Atlas of Clinical Oral
Pathology. Philadelphia, PA: Lea & Febiger, 1991. Used with permission.

298

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 7-26 Thyroid Enlargement and Function

Diffuse Enlargement. Includes the isthmus and lateral
lobes; there are no discretely palpable nodules. Causes include
Graves disease, Hashimoto thyroiditis, and endemic goiter.

Single Nodule. May be a cyst, a benign tumor, or one
nodule within a multinodular gland. It raises the question of
malignancy. Risk factors are prior irradiation, hardness, rapid
growth, ﬁxation to surrounding tissues, enlarged cervical
nodes, and occurrence in men.

Multinodular Goiter. An enlarged thyroid gland with two or more nodules suggests
a metabolic rather than a neoplastic process. Positive family history and continuing
nodular enlargement are additional risk factors for malignancy.

Table 7-27 Symptoms and Signs of Thyroid Dysfunction
Hyperthyroidism

Hypothyroidism

Symptoms

Nervousness
Weight loss despite increased appetite
Excessive sweating and heat intolerance
Palpitations
Frequent bowel movements
Tremor and proximal muscle weakness

Fatigue, lethargy
Modest weight gain with anorexia
Dry, coarse skin and cold intolerance
Swelling of face, hands, and legs
Constipation
Weakness, muscle cramps, arthralgias, paresthesias,
impaired memory and hearing

Signs

Warm, smooth, moist skin
With Graves disease, eye signs such as stare, lid
lag, and exophthalmos
Increased systolic and decreased diastolic blood
pressures
Tachycardia or atrial ﬁbrillation
Hyperdynamic cardiac pulsations with an
accentuated S1
Tremor and proximal muscle weakness

Dry, coarse, cool skin, sometimes yellowish from carotene,
with nonpitting myxedema and loss of hair
Periorbital myxedema
Low-pitched speech
Decreased systolic and increased diastolic blood pressures
Bradycardia and, in late stages, hypothermia
Sometimes decreased intensity of heart sounds
Prolonged relaxation phase during ankle reﬂex
Impaired memory, mixed hearing loss, somnolence,
peripheral neuropathy, carpal tunnel syndrome

Sources: Siminoski K. Does this patient have a goiter? JAMA. 1995;273:813. McDermott MT. In the clinic: hypothyroidism. Ann Intern Med. 2009;151:ITC6–1;
McDermott MT. In the clinic: hyperthyroidism. Ann Intern Med. 2012;157:ITC1–1. Franklyn JA. Subclinical thyroid disorders—consequences and implications
for treatment. Ann Endocrinol. 2007;68:229.

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

299

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
REFERENCES

References
1. Lipton RB, Bigal ME, Diamond M, et al. Migraine prevalence, disease burden, and the need for preventative therapy. Neurology.
2007;68:343.
2. Lipton RB, Stewart WF, Seymour D, et al. Prevalence and burden
of migraine in the United States: data from the American Migraine
Study II. Headache. 2001;41:646.
3. Hale N, Paauw DS. Diagnosis and treatment of headache in the
ambulatory care setting: a review of classic presentations and new
considerations in diagnosis and management. Med Clin North Am.
2014;98:505.
4. Lipton RB, Bigal ME, Steiner TJ, et al. Classiﬁcation of primary
headaches. Neurology. 2004;63:427.
5. Headache Classiﬁcation Committee of the International Headache
Society (IHS). The International Classiﬁcation of Headache Disorders, 3rd edition (beta version). Cephalalgia. 2013;33:629.
6. Hainer B, Matheson E. Approach to acute headache in adults. Am
Fam Physician. 2013;87:682.
7. Sun-Edelstein C, Bigal ME, Rappoport AM. Chronic migraine and
medication overuse headache: clarifying the current International
Headache Society classiﬁcation criteria. Cephalalgia. 2009;29:445.
8. Fumal A, Schoenen J. Tension-type headache: current research
and clinical management. Lancet Neurol. 2008;7:70.
9. Olesen J, Steiner T, Bousser MG, et al. Proposals for new standardized general diagnostic criteria for the secondary headaches. Cephalalgia. 2009;29:1331.
10. Schwedt TJ, Matharu MS, Dodick DW. Thunderclap headache.
Lancet Neurol. 2006;5:621.
11. McGregor EA. In the clinic: migraine. Ann Intern Med. 2013;
159:ITC5–1.
12. World Health Organization. Medical Eligibility Criteria For Contraceptive Use. 4th ed. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2010.
Available at: http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/
family_planning/9789241563888/en/. Accessed March 26, 2015.
13. Spector JT, Kahn SR, Jones MR, et al. Migraine headache and ischemic stroke risk: an updated meta-analysis. Am J Med. 2010;
123:612.
14. Harris M, Kaneshiro B. An evidence-based approach to hormonal
contraception and headaches. Contraception. 2009;80:417.
15. Kurth T, Slomke MA, Kase CS, et al. Migraine, headache, and the
risk of stroke in women: a prospective study. Neurology. 2005;64:
1020.
16. Dodick DW. Chronic daily headache. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:158.
17. Gardner K. Genetics of migraine: an update. Headache. 2006;
46:S19.
18. Shingleton BJ, O’Donoghue MW. Blurred vision. N Engl J Med.
2000;343:556.
19. Patel K, Patel S. Angle-closure glaucoma. Dis Mon. 2014;60:254.
20. Hollands H, Johnson D, Hollands S, et al. Do ﬁndings on routine
examination identify patients at risk for primary open-angle glaucoma? The rational clinical examination systematic review. JAMA.
2013;309:2035.
21. Graves J, Balcer LJ. Eye disorders in patients with multiple sclerosis: natural history and management. Clin Ophthalmol. 2010;4:
1409.
22. Dooley MC, Foroozan R. Optic neuritis. J Ophthalmic Vis Res.
2010;5:182.

300

23. Balcer LJ. Optic neuritis. N Engl J Med. 2006;354:1273.
24. Noble J, Chaudhary V. Age-related macular degeneration. CMAJ.
2010;182:1759.
25. Hollands H, Johnson D, Brox AC, et al. Acute-onset ﬂoaters and
ﬂashes: is this patient at risk for retinal detachment? JAMA.
2009;302:2243.
26. Meltzer DI. Painless red eye. Am Fam Physician. 2013;88:533.
27. Singh M, Sanborn A. Painful red eye. Am Fam Physician. 2013;
87:127.
28. Uy J, Forciea MA. In the clinic. Hearing loss. Ann Intern Med.
2013;158:ITC4–1.
29. Raviv D, Dror AA, Avraham KB. Hearing loss: a common disorder
caused by many rare alleles. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2010;1214:168.
30. Pichichero ME. Otitis media. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2013;60:391.
31. Baguley D, McFerran D, Hall D. Tinnitus. Lancet. 2013 382(9904):
1600.
32. Chan Y. Differential diagnosis of dizziness. Curr Opin Otolaryngol
Head Neck Surg. 2009;17:200.
33. Wheatley LM, Togias A. Clinical Practice. Allergic rhinitis. N Engl
J Med. 2015;372:456.
34. Foden N, Burgess C, Shepherd K, et al. A guide to the management of acute rhinosinusitis in primary care: management strategy
based on best evidence and recent European guidelines. Br J Gen
Pract. 2013;63:611.
35. Aring AM, Chan MM. Acute rhinosinusitis in adults. Am Fam Physician. 2011;83:1057.
36. Dykewicz MS, Hamilos DL. Rhinitis and sinusitis. J Allergy Clin
Immunol. 2010;125(2 Suppl 2):S103.
37. McIsaac WJ, Kellner JD, Aufricht P, et al. Empirical validation of
guidelines for the management of pharyngitis in children and
adults. JAMA. 2004;291:1587.
38. Shulman ST, Bisno AL, Clegg HW, et al. Clinical practice guideline
for the diagnosis and management of Group A Streptococcal pharyngitis: 2012 Update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis. 2012;55:1279.
39. Wessels MR. Streptococcal pharyngitis. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:648.
40. Schwartz SR, Cohen SM, Dailey SH, et al. Clinical practice guideline: hoarseness (dysphonia). Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2009;
141(3 Suppl 2):S1.
41. Vitale S, Cotch MF, Sperduto RD. Prevalence of visual impairment
in the United States. JAMA. 2006;295:2158.
42. Chou CF, Cotch MF, Vitale S, et al. Age-related eye diseases and
visual impairment among U.S. adults. Am J Prev Med. 2013;
45:29.
43. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for impaired visual
acuity in older adults: recommendation statement. Ann Intern
Med. 2009;151:37, W10.
44. American Academy of Ophthalmology Preferred Practice Patterns
Committee. Preferred Practice Pattern Guideline. Comprehensive
Adult Medical Eye Evaluation. San Francisco, CA: American Academy of Ophthalmology; 2010. Available at http://one.aao.org/
preferred-practice-pattern/comprehensive-adult-medical-eyeevaluationoctobe. Accessed March 28, 2015.
45. Vajaranant TS, Wu S, Torres M, et al. The changing face of primary
open-angle glaucoma in the United States: demographic and geographic changes from 2011 to 2050. Am J Ophthalmol. 2012;
154:303.
46. Moyer VA. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force Recommendation
Statement: Screening for glaucoma. Ann Intern Med. 2013;159:484.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
REFERENCES
47. American Academy of Ophthalmology, Screening for Diabetic
Retinopathy 2014—Information Statement. November 2006.
Updated October 2014. At http://one.aao.org/clinical-statement/
screening-diabetic-retinopathy–june-2012. Accessed March 23,
2015.
48. Roberts JE. Ultraviolet radiation as a risk factor for cataract and
macular degeneration. Eye Contact Lens. 2011;37:246.
49. Ventry IM, Weinstein BE. Identiﬁcation of elderly people with
hearing problems. ASHA. 1983;25:37.
50. Moyer VA. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation
statement: Screening for hearing loss in older adults. Ann Intern
Med. 2012;157:655.
51. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Untreated dental caries (cavities) in children ages 2–19, United States. Updated February 2011. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/Features/dsUntreated
CavitiesKids/. Accessed March 28, 2015.
52. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Oral health for adults.
Updated July 2013. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/oralhealth/
children_adults/adults.htm. Accessed March 28, 2015.
53. Eke PI, Dye BA, Wei L, et al. Prevalence of periodontitis in adults
in the United States: 2009 and 2010. J Dent Res. 2012;91:914.
54. Siegel R, Ma J, Zou Z, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2014. CA Cancer
J Clin. 2014;64:9.
55. Moyer VA. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement: Screening for oral cancer. Ann Intern Med. 2014;
160:55.
56. Cleveland JL, Junger ML, Saraiya M, et al. The connection between
human papillomavirus and oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas in the United States: implications for dentistry. J Am Dent
Assoc. 2011;142:915.
57. Gillison ML, Broutian T, Pickard RK, et al. Prevalence of oral HPV
infection in the United States, 2009–2010. JAMA. 2012;307:693.
58. Rethman MP, Carpenter W, Cohen EE, et al. Evidence-based clinical recommendations regarding screening for oral squamous cell
carcinomas. J Am Dent Assoc. 2010;141:509.
59. Harper RA. Basic Ophthalmology. 9th ed. San Francisco, CA: American Academy of Ophthalmology; 2010.
60. Kerr NM, Chew SS, Eady EK, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of confrontation visual ﬁeld tests. Neurology. 2010;74:1184.
61. McGee S. Evidence Based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. St. Louis, MO:
Elsevier; 2012:516–520.
62. Goodwin D. Homonymous hemianopia: challenges and solutions.
Clin Ophthalmol. 2014;8:1919.
63. McGee S. Evidence Based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. St. Louis, MO:
Elsevier; 2012:161.
64. Morgan WH, Lind CR, Kain S. Retinal vein pulsation is in phase
with intracranial pressure and not intraocular pressure. Invest
Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2012;53:4676.
65. Jacks AS, Miller NR. Spontaneous retinal venous pulsation: aetiology and signiﬁcance. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2004;74:7.
66. Bagai A, Thavendiranathan P, Detsky AS. Does this patient have
hearing impairment? JAMA. 2006;295:416.
67. McShefferty D, Whitmer WM, Swan IR, et al. The effect of experience on the sensitivity and speciﬁcity of the whispered voice test:
a diagnostic accuracy study. BMJ Open. 2013;3(4). doi: 10.1136/
bmjopen-2012–002394.
68. Pirozzo S, Papinczak T, Glasziou P. Whispered voice test for
screening for hearing impairment in adults and children: systematic review. BMJ. 2003;327:967.

69. Eekhof JA, de Bock GH, de Laat JA, et al. The whispered voice: the
best test for screening for hearing impairment in general practice?
Br J Gen Pract. 1996;46:473.
70. McGee S. Evidence Based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. St. Louis, MO:
Elsevier; 2012:190.
71. Kaplan A. Canadian guidelines for acute bacterial rhinosinusitis:
clinical summary. Can Fam Physician. 2014;60:227.
72. Neville BW, Day TA. Oral cancer and precancerous lesions. CA
Cancer J Clin. 2002;52:195.
73. Brocklehurst P, Kujan O, O’Malley LA, et al. Screening programmes for the early detection and prevention of oral cancer.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;(11):CD004150.
74. Lestón J, Dios DP. Diagnostic clinical aids in oral cancer. Oral
Oncol. 2010;46:418.
75. Gonsalves WC, Chi AC, Neville BW. Common oral lesions: Part I.
Superﬁcial mucosal lesions; Part II: Masses and neoplasia. Am
Fam Physician. 2007;75:501, 507.
76. Reamy BV, Derby R, Bunt CW. Common tongue conditions in
primary care. Am Fam Physician. 2010;81(5):627.
77. Kociolek LK, Shulman ST. In the clinic: pharyngitis. Ann Intern
Med. 2012;157:ITC3–1.
78. Bitner MD, Capes JP, Houry DE. Images in emergency medicine.
Adult epiglottitis. Ann Emerg Med. 2007;49:560.
79. Bahn RS, Castro MR. Approach to the patient with nontoxic multinodular goiter. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011;96:1202.
80. Syrenicz A, Koziołek M, Ciechanowicz A, et al. New insights into
the diagnosis of nodular goiter. Thyroid Res. 2014;7:6.
81. Siminoski K. Does this patient have a goiter? JAMA. 1995;273:813.
82. White ML, Doherty GM, Gauger PG. Evidence-based surgical
management of substernal goiter. World J Surg. 2008;32:1285.
83. De Filippis EA, Sabet A, Sun MR, et al. Pemberton’s sign: explained
nearly 70 years later. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014;99:1949.
84. Almandoz JP, Gharib H. Hypothyroidism: etiology, diagnosis, and
management. Med Clin North Am. 2012;96:203.
85. Garber JR, Cobin RH, Gharib H, et al. Clinical practice guidelines
for hypothyroidism in adults: cosponsored by the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists and the American Thyroid
Association.; American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists
and American Thyroid Association Taskforce on Hypothyroidism
in Adults. Endocr Pract. 2012;18:988.
86. McDermott MT. In the clinic: hypothyroidism. Ann Intern Med.
2009;151:ITC6–1.
87. Bahn RS, Burch HB, Cooper DS, et al. American Thyroid Association; American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists. Hyperthyroidism and other causes of thyrotoxicosis: management guidelines
of the American Thyroid Association and American Association of
Clinical Endocrinologists. Endocr Pract. 2011;17:456.
88. McDermott MT. In the clinic: hyperthyroidism. Ann Intern Med.
2012;157:ITC1–1.
89. Franklyn JA. Subclinical thyroid disorders—consequences and
implications for treatment. Ann Endocrinol. 2007;68:229.
90. Durante C, Costante G, Lucisano G, et al. The natural history of
benign thyroid nodules. JAMA. 2015;313:926.
91. Popoveniuc G, Jonklaas J. Thyroid nodules. Med Clin North Am.
2012;96:329.
92. Bahn RS. Mechanisms of disease: Graves’ ophthalmopathy. N Engl
J Med. 2010;362:726.
93. Phelps PO, Williams K. Thyroid eye disease for the primary care
physician. Dis Mon. 2014;60:292.

CHAPTER 7

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Head and Neck

301

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
REFERENCES
94. Bartalena L, Tanda LM. Graves’ ophthalmopathy. N Engl J Med.
2009;380:994.
95. Birkholz ES, Oetting TA. Kayser Fleischer Ring: A systems based
review of the ophthalmologist’s role in the diagnosis of Wilson’s
disease. EyeRounds.org. July 28 2009. Available at http://webeye.
ophth.uiowa.edu/eyeforum/cases/97-kayser-ﬂeischer-ring-wilsons-disease.htm. Accessed March 29, 2015.
96. Sullivan CA, Chopdar A, Shun-Shin GA. Dense Kayser-Fleischer
ring in asymptomatic Wilson’s disease (hepatolenticular degeneration). Br J Ophthalmol. 2002;86:114.

302

97. Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study Research Group.
Grading diabetic retinopathy from stereoscopic color fundus
photographs—an extension of the modiﬁed Airlie House classiﬁcation. Ophthalmology. 1991;98:786.
98. Antonetti DA, Klein R, Gardner TW. Diabetic retinopathy—
mechanisms of disease. N Engl J Med. 2012;366:1237.
99. McGee S. Evidence Based Physical Diagnosis, 3rd ed. St. Louis, MO:
Elsevier; 2012:208.
100. McGee S. Evidence Based Physical Diagnosis, 3rd ed. St. Louis, MO:
Elsevier; 2012:163–179

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

