http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

C H A P T E R

16

The Musculoskeletal
System
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (Vol. 16: Musculoskeletal System)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com

Musculoskeletal disorders are the leading primary diagnosis during ofﬁce visits
in the United States.1 In 2012, these disorders totaled 93 million visits, or 10%
of all ambulatory care visits, highlighting the need for competent ofﬁce examinations. Arthritis affects one in ﬁve Americans, or 22% of the adult population, and
is the leading cause of disability, costing well above $128 billion a year.2 Spinal
disorders are the fourth highest diagnostic group for ofﬁce visits. In 2010, 29%
of Americans reported low back pain alone.3 Low back symptoms, one of the top
20 reasons for ofﬁce visits, represent a continuing clinical challenge;1 many cases
are “nonspeciﬁc,” yet they are one of the most common and expensive causes of
work-related disability.4

Prevalence for most conditions varies
by gender. Osteoarthritis (OA), for
example, is more common in women,
especially in the knee.

Each of the major joints has unique anatomy and directional movement. In this
chapter, the Anatomy and Physiology section and Techniques for Examination
are combined to help students apply their knowledge of the anatomy and function
of each joint to the speciﬁc examination techniques needed. These sections follow a head-to-toe sequence, beginning with the jaw and joints of the upper
extremities and ending with the ankles and feet. For each joint, look for sections
on: Joint Overview, which describes the distinguishing anatomical and functional characteristics of the joint; Bony Structures and Joints; Muscle Groups and
Additional Structures; and Techniques of Examination, which presents examination techniques speciﬁc to that joint—inspection, palpation of bony and soft
tissue structures, range of motion (the arc of measurable joint movement in a
single plane), and maneuvers for testing joint function and stability. Sharpen
your skills of inspection as you examine the surface structures and contours of
each joint. Learn to visualize the joint’s underlying anatomy. Visualization
helps trigger the examination techniques and maneuvers you will need to perform next.
FIGURE 16-1.
health.

C H A P T E R 16

Exercise is key to

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

625

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
APPROACH TO MUSCULOSKELETAL DISORDERS

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Approach to Musculoskeletal
Disorders
The ﬁrst goal of your evaluation of musculoskeletal disorders is to characterize
the patient’s complaint in terms of four key features. Is the joint problem:
■ Articular or extra-articular
■ Acute (usually <6 weeks) or chronic (usually >12 weeks)
■ Inﬂammatory or noninﬂammatory
■ Localized (monoarticular) or diffuse (polyarticular)

Review the anatomical terminology that pertains to the joints and the useful
algorithm in Figure 16-2. The authors note that, “This approach is remarkably
effective and relies on clinical and historic features, rather than laboratory testing,
to diagnose many common . . . disorders.”5

Joint Anatomy—Important Terms
●

●

Articular structures include the joint capsule and articular cartilage, the
synovium and synovial ﬂuid, intra-articular ligaments, and juxta-articular bone.
Articular cartilage is composed of a collagen matrix containing charged ions
and water, allowing the cartilage to change shape in response to pressure or
load, acting as a cushion for underlying bone. Synovial ﬂuid provides nutrition to
the adjacent relatively avascular articular cartilage.

Articular disease typically involves
swelling and tenderness of the entire
joint, crepitus, instability, “locking,” or
deformity, and limits both active and
passive range of motion due to either
stiffness or pain.5

Extra-articular structures include periarticular ligaments, tendons, bursae,
muscle, fascia, bone, nerve, and overlying skin.
● Ligaments are rope-like bundles of collagen ﬁbrils that connect bone to bone.
● Tendons are collagen ﬁbers connecting muscle to bone.
● Bursae are pouches of synovial ﬂuid that cushion the movement of tendons
and muscles over bone or other joint structures.

Extra-articular disease typically
involves “point or focal tenderness in
regions adjacent to articular structures” and limits active range of
motion. Extra-articular disease rarely
causes swelling, instability, or joint
deformity.

Age also provides clues to causes of joint pain.5
■ If age <60 years, consider repetitive strain or overuse syndromes like tendini-

tis or bursitis, crystalline arthritis (gout; crystalline pyrophosphate deposition
disease [CPPD]) (males), rheumatoid arthritis (RA), psoriatic arthritis and
reactive (Reiter) arthritis (in inﬂammatory bowel disease [IBD]), and infectious arthritis from gonorrhea, Lyme disease, or viral or bacterial infections.
■ If age >60 years, look for OA, gout and pseudogout, polymyalgia rheumatica

(PMR), osteoporotic fracture, and septic bacterial arthritis.
626

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Approach to Musculoskeletal Disorders

Approach to Musculoskeletal Complaints
Musculoskeletal complaint

Initial history and physical examination
to determine
1. Is it intra- or extra-articular?
2. Is it acute or chronic?
3. Is inflammation present?
4. How many/which joints are involved?
Nonarticular condition
Consider
• Trauma/fracture
• Fibromyalgia
• Polymyalgia rheumatica
• Bursitis
• Tendinitis

No

Is it intra-articular?
Yes

Is complaint >6 wks?
Consider
• Acute arthritis
• Infectious arthritis
• Gout
• Pseudogout
• Reiter syndrome
• Initial presentation
of chronic arthritis

Yes

No

Acute

Chronic

Is inflammation present?
1. Is there prolonged morning stiffness?
2. Is there soft tissue swelling?
3. Are there systemic symptoms?
4. Is the ESR or CRP elevated?
Yes

No

Chronic
noninflammatory
arthritis

Chronic
inflammatory
arthritis

How many
joints involved?

1–3

Are DIP, CMC1, hip, or
knee joints involved?
Yes

No

Unlikely to be
osteoarthritis
Consider
• Charcot arthritis

Osteoarthritis

KEY:
CMC = Carpometacarpal
CRP = C-reactive protein
DIP = Distal interphalangeal
ESR = Erythrocyte sedimentation rate
JA = Juvenile arthritis
MCP = Metacarpophalangeal
MTP = Metatarsophalangeal
PIP = Proximal interphalangeal
PMR = Polymyalgia rheumatica
SLE = Systemic lupus

>3

Chronic inflammatory
mono/oligoarthritis
Consider
• Indolent infection
• Psoriatic arthritis
• Reiter syndrome
• Pauciarticular JA

Chronic inflammatory
polyarthritis

Is involvement
symmetric?
Yes

No

Consider
• Psoriatic arthritis
• Reiter syndrome

Are PIP, MCP, or
MTP joints
involved?
Yes

No

Unlikely to be
rheumatoid arthritis
Consider
• SLE
• Scleroderma
• Polymyositis

Rheumatoid
arthritis

Adapted from: Kasper DL, Braunwald E, Fauci AS, et al., eds. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine, 16th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2005.

Figure 16-2.

Algorithm for diagnosis of musculoskeletal complaints. SOURCE: Cush
JJ, Lipsky PE. In: Longo DL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al. (eds). Chapter 331, Approach to Articular and Musculoskeletal Disorders, in
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. 18th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2012.
C h a p t e r 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

627

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
APPROACH TO MUSCULOSKELETAL DISORDERS

Types of Joints
To evaluate joint function, it is important to know the types of joints and how
they articulate, or interconnect, and the role of bursae in easing joint movement.
There are three primary types of joint articulation—synovial, cartilaginous, and
ﬁbrous—which allow varying degrees of movement.
Joints
Type of Joint

Extent of Movement

Example

Synovial
Cartilaginous
Fibrous

Freely movable
Slightly movable
Immovable

Knee, shoulder
Vertebral bodies of the spine
Skull sutures

Synovial Joints. The bones of these
joints do not touch each other, and the
joint articulations are freely movable within
the limits of the surrounding ligaments
(Fig. 16-3). The bones are covered by
articular cartilage and separated by a
synovial cavity that cushions joint
movement. A synovial membrane lines the
synovial cavity and secretes a small amount
of viscous lubricating ﬂuid, the synovial
ﬂuid. The membrane is attached at the
margins of the articular cartilage and
pouched or folded to accommodate joint
movement. Surrounding the joint is a
ﬁbrous joint capsule, which is strengthened
by ligaments extending from bone to bone.

Bone
Ligament
Synovial membrane
Joint space
Joint capsule
Synovial cavity
Articular
cartilage

FIGURE 16-3.

Cartilaginous Joints. These joints,
such as the intervertebral joints and the
symphysis pubis, are slightly movable
(Fig. 16-4). Fibrocartilaginous discs
separate the bony surfaces. At the center
of each disc is the nucleus pulposus,
somewhat gelatinous ﬁbrocartilaginous
material that serves as a cushion or shock
absorber between bony surfaces.

Vertebral body
Nucleus pulposus
of the disc
Disc

Ligament

FIGURE 16-4.

628

Synovial joint.

Cartilaginous joint.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
APPROACH TO MUSCULOSKELETAL DISORDERS
Fibrous Joints. In these joints, such
as the sutures of the skull, intervening
layers of ﬁbrous tissue or cartilage hold
the bones together (Fig. 16-5). The bones
are almost in direct contact, which allows
no appreciable movement.

FIGURE 16-5.

Fibrous joint.

Synovial Joints and Bursae
As you learn to examine the musculoskeletal system, focus on relating the anatomy of the joint to its movement.
Synovial Joints
Type of Joint

Articular Shape

Movement

Example

Spheroidal
(ball and
socket)

Convex surface in
concave cavity

Shoulder, hip

Hinge

Flat, planar

Wide-ranging–
ﬂexion, extension, abduction,
adduction,
rotation, circumduction
Motion in one
plane; ﬂexion,
extension

Condylar

Convex or concave

Movement of two
articulating
surfaces not
dissociable

Interphalangeal joints of
hand and
foot; elbow
Knee; temporomandibular
joint

Many of the joints we examine are synovial, or movable, joints. The shape of the
articulating surfaces of synovial joints, as well as the surrounding soft tissues,
determines the direction and extent of joint motion. Younger people and women
tend to have increased soft tissue laxity, leading to increased range of motion
(“double-jointed”).
Spheroidal Joints. Spheroidal joints
have a ball-and-socket conﬁguration—a
rounded, convex surface articulating with a
concave cuplike cavity, allowing a wide
range of rotatory movement, as in the
shoulder and hip (Fig. 16-6).

FIGURE 16-6.
(ball and socket).

Spheroidal joint

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

629

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY
Hinge Joints. Hinge joints are ﬂat,
planar, or slightly curved, allowing only a
gliding motion in a single plane, as in ﬂexion
and extension of the digits (Fig. 16-7).

F I G U R E 1 6 - 7 . Hinge joint.

Condylar Joints. Condylar joints, such
as the knee, have articulating surfaces that are
convex or concave (Fig. 16-8). These joints
allow ﬂexion, extension, rotation, and motion
in the coronal plane.
Bursae. Bursae are roughly disc-shaped
synovial sacs that ease joint action and allow
adjacent muscles or muscles and tendons to
glide over each other during movement. They
lie between the skin and the convex surface of
a bone or joint, as in the prepatellar bursa of
the knee (p. 684) or in areas where tendons or
muscles rub against bone, ligaments, or other
tendons or muscles, as in the subacromial
bursa of the shoulder (pp. 648–652).

F I G U R E 1 6 - 8 . Condylar joint.

As you examine joints, knowing the underlying joint anatomy and allowable
movement will help you assess degenerative disorders and trauma. Your knowledge of the soft tissue structures, ligaments, tendons, and bursae will help you
evaluate inﬂammatory disorders and overuse syndromes.

The Health History
Common or Concerning Symptoms
Joint pain: articular or extra-articular, acute or chronic, inﬂammatory or
noninﬂammatory, localized or diﬀuse
● Joint pain: associated constitutional symptoms and systemic manifestations
from other organ systems
● Neck pain
● Low back pain
●

Joint pain is a leading complaint of patients seeking health care. In addition to
eliciting the seven features of any joint pain, adopt the tips below to guide your
subsequent examination and diagnosis:

630

See Chapter 3, Interviewing and the
Health History, for the seven features
of pain, pp. 79–80.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY

Tips for Assessing Joint Pain
Ask the patient to “point to the pain.” This may save considerable time
because many patients have trouble pinpointing pain location in words.
● Clarify and record when the pain started and the mechanism of injury, particularly if there is a history of trauma.
● Determine whether the pain is articular or extra-articular, acute or chronic,
inﬂammatory or noninﬂammatory, and localized (monoarticular) or diﬀuse
(polyarticular).
●

Joint Pain: Identifying Important Characteristics
Articular or Extra-articular. Begin by asking “Do you have any pains in
your joints?” Joint pain may be articular or extra-articular. Ask the patient to
point to the pain.
■ If pain is localized to only one joint, it is monoarticular. Pain originating in

the small joints of the hands and feet is more sharply localized than pain in
larger joints. Pain from the hip joint is especially deceptive. True pain from
the hip joint is typically described in the groin. Sacral/sacroiliac pain is often
in the buttock, and trochanteric pain from bursitis occurs on the lateral
thigh.
■ Joint pain may be polyarticular, involving several joints, typically four or

more. If polyarticular, what is the pattern of involvement . . . migrating from
joint to joint or steadily spreading from one joint to multiple joints? Is the
involvement symmetric, affecting similar joints on both sides of the body?

■ Joint pain may also be extra-articular, involving bones, muscles, and tissues

around the joint such as the tendons, bursae, or even overlying skin. Generalized “aches and pains” are called myalgias if in muscles, and arthralgias if
there is pain but no evidence of arthritis.
Note that the symptoms of decreased joint movement and stiffness can help you
decide if the pain is articular.
■ To assess decreased or limited movement, ask about changes in activity due to

problems with the involved joint, for example, in the ability to walk, stand,
lean over, sit or sit up, rise from a sitting position, pinch, grasp, turn a page,
or open a door handle or jar. Common activities like combing hair, brushing
teeth, eating, dressing, and bathing may also be affected.

Pain in a single joint suggests injury,
monoarticular arthritis, or extraarticular causes like tendinitis or bursitis. Lateral hip pain with focal tenderness over the greater trochanter is
typical of trochanteric bursitis.
In rheumatic fever or gonococcal
arthritis, there is a migratory pattern
of spread; in RA, the pattern is additive and progressive with symmetric
involvement. Inflammatory arthritides are more common in women.
Extra-articular pain occurs in inflammation of bursae (bursitis), tendons
(tendinitis), or tendon sheaths (tenosynovitis) as well as in sprains from
stretching or tearing of ligaments.
In articular joint pain there is
decreased active and passive range
or motion and morning stiffness or
“gelling” (see page 633); in nonarticular joint pain, there is periarticular
tenderness and only passive range of
motion remains intact.

■ Musculoskeletal stiffness refers to a perceived tightness or resistance to move-

ment, in contrast to normal movement that is limber.

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

631

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY
Acute or Chronic. Acute joint pain typically lasts up to 6 weeks; chronic
pain lasts >12 weeks.

Assess the onset, duration, quality, and severity of the joint symptoms. Onset is
especially important. Did the pain or discomfort develop rapidly over the course
of a few hours or insidiously over weeks or even months? Has the pain
progressed slowly or ﬂuctuated, with periods of improvement and worsening?
How long has the pain lasted? What is it like over the course of a day? . . . In the
morning?… As the day wears on?

Severe pain of rapid onset in a red
swollen joint suggests acute septic
arthritis or crystalline arthritis (gout;
CPPD).6,7 In children, consider osteomyelitis in a bone contiguous to a joint.

If more rapid in onset, how did the pain arise? Was there an acute injury or
overuse from repetitive motion of the same part of the body? If the pain comes
from trauma, what was the mechanism of injury or the speciﬁc series of events
that caused the joint pain? Furthermore, what aggravates or relieves the pain?
What are the effects of exercise, rest, and therapy?

See Table 16-1, Patterns of Pain in and
Around the Joints, pp. 696–697.

Inﬂammatory or Noninﬂammatory. Try to determine whether the joint
pain is inﬂammatory or noninﬂammatory. Different mechanisms appear to be
involved—interleukins and tumor necrosis factor in inﬂammatory joint pain,
and prostaglandins, chemokines, and growth factors in noninﬂammatory pain.8

Inflammatory disorders have many
causes5: infectious (Neisseria gonorrhoeae or Mycobacterium tuberculosis),
crystal-induced (gout, pseudogout),
immune-related (RA, systemic lupus erythematosus [SLE]), reactive (rheumatic
fever, reactive arthritis), or idiopathic.
In noninflammatory disorders,
consider trauma (rotator cuff tear),
repetitive use (bursitis, tendinitis),
degenerative changes (OA), or
fibromyalgia.

Ask about the four cardinal features of inﬂammation—swelling, warmth, and
redness, in addition to pain. Several of these features are best assessed on examination, but patients can often guide you to points of inﬂammation and pain.
Also ask about fever or chills.

Inflammation with fever and chills is
seen in septic arthritis; also consider
crystalline arthritis.

Elicit any pattern of stiffness. Is it worse in the morning but gradually better with
activity? Or is there an intermittent “gel phenomenon,” namely brief periods of
daytime stiffness following inactivity that usually last from 30 to 60 minutes then
get worse again with movement?

Morning stiffness that gradually
improves with activity is more common in inflammatory disorders like RA
and PMR9–11; intermittent stiffness
and gelling are seen in OA.12

Localized or Diffuse. Ask the patient which joints are painful. Joint pain
can be monoarticular, oligoarticular involving two to four joints, or polyarticular.
If there is pain in more than one joint, is the pattern of involvement symmetric
or asymmetric?

Monoarticular arthritis can be traumatic, crystalline, or septic. Oligoarticular arthritis occurs in infection from
gonorrhea or rheumatic fever, connective tissue disease, and OA. Polyarthritis may be viral or inflammatory
from RA, SLE, or psoriasis.8

632

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY

Involvement is usually symmetric in
RA, SLE, and ankylosing spondylitis
and asymmetric in psoriatic, reactive
(Reiter), and IBD-associated arthritis.

Joint Pain: Associated Constitutional Symptoms and Systemic Manifestations from Other Organ Systems. Some joint problems have associated constitutional symptoms such as fever, chills, rash, fatigue, anorexia, weight
loss, and weakness.

Constitutional symptoms are common in RA, SLE, PMR, and other
inflammatory arthritides. High fever
and chills suggest an infectious cause.

In inﬂammatory conditions, initial laboratory tests such as the erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, platelet count, and hematocrit are helpful.

Leukemia can infiltrate the synovium;
chemotherapy can also cause joint
pain.

Some joint disorders have systemic manifestations in other organ systems that
provide important clues to diagnosis. Ask about any family history of joint or
muscle disorders. Watch for the symptoms, signs, and disorders below.
Joint Pain and Systemic Disorders
●

Skin conditions
● Butterﬂy (malar) rash on the cheeks

Systemic lupus erythematosus

●

Scaly plaques, especially on extensor surfaces, and pitted nails

Psoriatic arthritis

●

Heliotrope rash on the upper eyelid

Dermatomyositis

●

Papules, pustules, or vesicles with reddened bases on the distal extremities

Gonococcal arthritis

●

Expanding erythematous “target” or “bull’s eye” patch early in an illness

Lyme disease (erythema chronicum
migrans)

●

Painful subcutaneous nodules especially in pretibial area

Sarcoidosis, Behçet disease (erythema
nodosum)13,14

●

Palpable purpura

Vasculitis

●

Hives

Serum sickness, drug reaction

●

Erosions or scaling on the penis and crusted scaling papules on the soles
and palms

Reactive (Reiter) arthritis (with
urethritis, uveitis)

●

The maculopapular rash of rubella

Arthritis of rubella

●

Nailfold capillary changes

Dermatomyositis, systemic sclerosis

●

Clubbing of the ﬁngernails (see p. 211)

Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy

●

Red, burning, and itchy eyes (conjunctivitis), eye pain and blurred vision (uveitis)

Reactive (Reiter) arthritis, Behçet
syndrome,13,14 ankylosing spondylitis

●

Scleritis

RA, IBD, vasculitis

●

Preceding sore throat

Acute rheumatic fever or gonococcal
arthritis

(continued )

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

633

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY

Joint Pain and Systemic Disorders (continued )
●

Oral ulcerations

RA (usually painless); Behçet disease

●

Pneumonitis; interstitial lung disease

RA; systemic sclerosis

●

Diarrhea, abdominal pain, cramping

IBD, reactive arthritis from Salmonella,
Shigella, Yersinia, Campylobacter;
scleroderma

●

Urethritis

Reactive (Reiter) arthritis, gonococcal
arthritis

●

Mental status change, facial or other weakness, stiﬀ neck

Lyme disease with central nervous
system involvement

Neck Pain. Neck pain is also common. If the patient reports neck trauma,
common in motor vehicle accidents, ask about neck tenderness and consider
clinical decision rules that identify risk of cervical cord injury. The NEXUS
criteria and the Canadian C-Spine Rule are highly sensitive and speciﬁc for
establishing a low probability of cervical spine injury.15–17 Persistent pain after
blunt trauma or a collision warrants further evaluation.

The NEXUS criteria are normal alertness, no posterior midline cervical
spine tenderness, no focal neurologic
deficits, no evidence of intoxication,
and no painful distracting injury. The
Canadian C-Spine Rule includes age,
mechanism of injury, low risk factors
allowing assessment of range of
motion, and testing of neck rotation.

Neck pain is usually self-limited, but it is important to ask about radiation into
the arm or scapular area, arm weakness, numbness, or paresthesias.18 Elicit any
of the “red ﬂag” symptoms listed below.

See Table 16-2, Pains in the Neck,
p. 698.

Low Back Pain. Begin by asking “Do you have any back pain?,”—at least
40% of adults have low back pain at least once during their lifetime, usually
between the ages of 30 and 50 years, and low back pain is one of the most
common reasons for ofﬁce visits. There are numerous clinical guidelines, but
most categorize low back pain into three groups: nonspeciﬁc (>90%), nerve
root entrapment with radiculopathy or spinal stenosis (∼5%), and pain from a
speciﬁc underlying disease (1% to 2%).4,20 Note that the term “nonspeciﬁc low
back pain” is preferred to “sprain” or “strain.” Using open-ended questions, get
a clear and complete picture of the problem, especially the location and radiation
of the pain and any prior history of trauma.

See Table 16-3, Low Back Pain, p. 699.

634

Radicular pain signals spinal nerve
compression and/or irritation, most
commonly at C7 or C6. Unlike low
back pain, the principal cause is
foraminal impingement from
degenerative joint changes (70% to
75%), rather than disc herniation
(20% to 25%).19

Nonspecific low back pain is usually
from musculoligamentous injuries
and age-related degenerative processes of the intervertebral discs
and facet joints.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY
Determine if the pain is on the midline, over the vertebrae, or off the midline.

For midline back pain, diagnoses
include musculoligamentous injury;
disc herniation; vertebral collapse;
spinal cord metastases; and, rarely,
epidural abscess. For pain off the midline, assess for muscle strain, sacroiliitis, trochanteric bursitis, sciatica, and
hip arthritis as well as for renal conditions like pyelonephritis or stones.

Is there radiation into the buttock or lower extremity? Is there any associated
numbness or paresthesias?

Sciatica is radicular gluteal and posterior leg pain in the S1 distribution that
increases with cough or Valsalva (see
pp. 765–766 for related neurologic
findings); 85% of cases are associated
with a disc disorder, usually at L4–L5
or L5–S1.21 Leg pain that resolves with
rest and/or lumbar forward flexion
occurs in spinal stenosis.

Importantly, is there any associated bladder or bowel dysfunction?

Consider cauda equina syndrome from
an S2–S4 midline disc or tumor if
there is bowel or bladder dysfunction
(usually urinary retention with overflow incontinence), especially if there
is saddle anesthesia or perineal
numbness. Pursue immediate imaging
and surgical evaluation.4

Elicit any key warning signs or “red ﬂags” for serious underlying systemic
disease.20

In cases of low back pain plus another
indicator, there is a pretest probability
of serious systemic disease of ∼10%.22

Red Flags for Low Back Pain from
Underlying Systemic Disease
Age <20 years or >50 years
History of cancer
● Unexplained weight loss, fever, or decline in general health
● Pain lasting more than 1 month or not responding to treatment
● Pain at night or present at rest
● History of intravenous drug use, addiction, or immunosuppression
● Presence of active infection or human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) infection
● Long-term steroid therapy
● Saddle anesthesia, bladder or bowel incontinence
● Neurologic symptoms or progressive neurologic deﬁcit
●
●

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

635

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

Health Promotion and
Counseling: Evidence and
Recommendations
Important Topics for Health Promotion
and Counseling
Nutrition, weight, and physical activity
Low back pain
● Osteoporosis: risk factors, screening, and assessing fracture risk
● Treating osteoporosis and preventing falls
●
●

The integrity of the musculoskeletal system brings many features of a healthy
lifestyle into play—nutrition, ﬁtness, optimal weight, and prevention of injury.
Each joint has speciﬁc vulnerabilities to trauma and wear. Proper lifting, avoiding falls, household safety measures, and a balanced physical activity program
protect and preserve well-functioning joints and muscles and prevent or delay
the onset of arthritis, chronic back pain, and osteoporosis, all important targets
for Healthy People 2020.25
Nutrition, Weight, and Physical Activity. Healthy habits directly
beneﬁt the skeleton and muscles. Good nutrition supplies calcium for bone
mineralization and bone density. A healthy weight reduces excess mechanical
stress on weight-bearing joints like the hips and knees.

See Chapter 4, Beginning the Physical
Examination: General Survey, Vital
Signs, and Pain, pp. 114–118, for further discussion of nutrition and weight.

The Healthy People 2020 objectives set goals
for physical activity aimed at increasing the proportion of adults meeting guidelines for aerobic
and muscle-strengthening physical activity
(Fig. 16-9).26 These goals are based on the 2008
Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans,27 an
evidence-based report that highlights the beneﬁts of physical activity, including risk reduction for early death, cardiovascular disease,
hypertension, type 2 diabetes, breast and colon
cancer, obesity, osteoporosis, falls, and depression. Physical activity also helps improve sleep
quality and cognitive function in older adults.
FIGURE 16-9.
physical activity.

636

Encourage

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans
At least 2 hours and 30 minutes a week of moderate-intensity, or 1 hour and
15 minutes a week of vigorous-intensity, aerobic physical activity, or an
equivalent combination
● Moderate- or high-intensity muscle-strengthening activity that involves all
major muscle groups on 2 or more days a week
●

The report includes guidelines to help sedentary people gradually build up their
activity level, starting with 10 minutes of exercise a day. Guided exercise regimens help reduce sports and exercise injuries, which are a signiﬁcant source of
musculoskeletal disorders.
Low Back Pain. The estimated lifetime prevalence of low back pain in the
United States population is over 80%.28 Spinal disorders are among the most
frequent reasons for adult outpatient visits,29 and the annual U.S. economic
costs attributed to diagnosing and managing low back pain and lost productivity
exceed $100 billion.27 Most patients with acute low back pain get better within
6 weeks; for patients with nonspeciﬁc symptoms, clinical guidelines emphasize
reassurance, staying active, analgesics, muscle relaxants, and spinal manipulation
therapy.30 Overall, about 10% to 15% of patients with acute low back pain
develop chronic symptoms, often associated with long-term disability.28 Factors
associated with poor outcomes include inappropriate beliefs that low back pain
is a serious clinical condition, maladaptive pain-coping behaviors (avoiding
work, movement, or other activities for fear of causing back damage), multiple
nonorganic physical examination ﬁndings, psychiatric disorders, poor general
health, high levels of baseline functional impairment, and low work
satisfaction.4,24 Review the nonorganic physical ﬁndings (the Waddell signs) on
p. 674.31 Appropriate treatments for chronic low back pain include treatments
for acute low back pain as well as back exercises and behavioral therapy.30
Opioids should be used cautiously, given their adverse effects and risks for
abuse.32

See Table 16-3, Low Back Pain, p. 699,
for serious causes of low back pain,
including back pain with sciatica or
neurogenic claudication, compression
fracture, malignancy, ankylosing spondylitis, and infection including osteomyelitis.
Studies show that psychosocial factors,
now called “yellow flags,” strongly
affect the course of low back
pain.20,23,24 Ask about anxiety, depression, and work stress. Assess any maladaptive coping, inappropriate fears or
beliefs, or tendency to somatization.

Osteoporosis: Risk Factors, Screening, and Assessing Fracture
Risk. Osteoporosis is a common U.S. health problem—9% of adults over
age 50 years have osteoporosis at the femoral neck or lumbar spine, including
16% of women and 4% of men.33 Half of all postmenopausal women sustain
an osteoporosis-related fracture during their lifetime; 25% develop vertebral
deformities; and 15% suffer hip fractures that increase risk of chronic pain,
disability, loss of independence, and increased mortality.34 Although mortality
rates are declining, about 3 in 10 patients die in the year following a hip
fracture.35 Men are also at risk: the lifetime risk for an osteoporotic fracture in
men over age 50 years is 1 in 4, and men are more likely than women to die in
the year following a hip fracture. Nearly half of adults age ≥50 years has
osteopenia, representing well over 30 million people, including about
12 million men.36 The majority of fragility fractures actually occur among
osteopenic adults.

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

637

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Risk Factors for Osteoporosis
Postmenopausal status in women
Age ≥50 years
● Prior fragility fracture
● Low body mass index
● Low dietary calcium
● Vitamin D deﬁciency
● Tobacco and excessive alcohol use
● Immobilization
● Inadequate physical activity
● Osteoporosis in a ﬁrst-degree relative, particularly with history of fragility
fracture
● Clinical conditions such as thyrotoxicosis, celiac sprue, IBD, cirrhosis, chronic
renal disease, organ transplantation, diabetes, HIV, hypogonadism, multiple
myeloma, anorexia nervosa, and rheumatologic and autoimmune disorders
● Medications such as oral and high-dose inhaled corticosteroids, anticoagulants (long-term use), aromatase inhibitors for breast cancer, methotrexate,
selected antiseizure medications, immunosuppressive agents, proton-pump
inhibitors (long-term use), and antigonadal therapy for prostate cancer
●
●

Screening Recommendations. The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
(USPSTF) gives a grade B recommendation supporting osteoporosis screening
for women age ≥65 years and for younger women whose 10-year fracture risk
equals or exceeds that of an average-risk 65-year-old white woman.34 The USPSTF ﬁnds that evidence about risks and beneﬁts for men is insufﬁcient (I statement) for recommending routine screening. However, the American College of
Physicians recommends that clinicians periodically assess older men for osteoporosis risk and measure bone density for those at increased risk who are candidates for drug therapy.37 Screen your patients for the many risk factors listed on
the preceding page, and proceed to further assessment.
Measuring Bone Density. Bone strength depends on bone quality, bone
density, and overall bone size. Because there is no direct measure of bone strength,
bone mineral density (BMD)—which provides roughly 70% of bone strength—is
used as a reasonable surrogate. Dual energy x-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) scanning of the lumbar spine and femoral neck is the optimal standard for measuring
bone density, diagnosing osteoporosis, and guiding treatment decisions. DEXA
measurement of bone density at the femoral neck is considered the best predictor
of hip fracture.

Bone mass peaks by age 30 years.
Bone loss from age-related declines in
estrogen and testosterone is initially
rapid, then slows and becomes continuous.

The World Health Organization (WHO) scoring criteria for T scores and Z scores,
measured in standard deviations (SDs), are used worldwide. A 1.0 SD decrease
in BMD is associated with a twofold increased risk for a fragility fracture.

638

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

World Health Organization Bone Density Criteria
●
●

Osteoporosis: T score < −2.5 (>2.5 SDs below the young adult mean)
Osteopenia: T score between −1.0 and −2.5 (1.0 to 2.5 SDs below the young
adult mean)

Bone densitometry scoring also includes Z scores representing comparisons with
age-matched controls. These measurements are useful for determining whether
bone loss is caused by an underlying disease or condition.
Assessing Fracture Risk. The USPSTF recommends using WHO’s Fracture Risk Assessment (FRAX) calculator. The FRAX calculator generates a 10-year
osteoporotic fracture risk based on age; gender; weight; height; parental fracture
history; use of glucocorticoids; presence of RA or conditions associated with
secondary osteoporosis; tobacco and heavy alcohol use; and, when available,
femoral neck BMD. The FRAX calculator also provides a 10-year hip fracture
risk. The website for the FRAX Calculator for Assessing Fracture Risk for the
United States is http://www.shef.ac.uk/FRAX/tool.jsp?country=9.

A previous low-impact fracture from
standing height or lower is the greatest risk factor for subsequent fracture.

FRAX has been validated for African American, Hispanic, and Asian women in
the United States and has calculators that are continent- and country-speciﬁc.
The USPSTF recommends using a 10-year osteoporotic fracture risk threshold of
9.3% when considering bone density screening in women ages 50 to 64 years.
Screening decisions for women in this age range should account for menopausal status, clinical judgment, and patient preferences and values.
Treating Osteoporosis and Preventing Falls
Calcium and Vitamin D. Calcium, the most abundant mineral in the
body, is essential for bone health, muscle function, nerve transmission, vascular
function, and intracellular signaling and hormonal secretion.38 Less than 1% of
total body calcium supports these metabolic functions; the remaining 99% is
stored in teeth and bones. Serum calcium is tightly regulated. The body relies on
bone tissue, and not dietary calcium, to maintain stable concentrations in blood,
muscle, and intracellular ﬂuid. Bone is subject to constant remodeling from calcium deposition and resorption; the balance between these processes varies during the different stages of life.

Humans acquire vitamin D from sunlight, food, and dietary supplements.38 Vitamin D from the skin and diet is metabolized in the liver to 25-hydroxyvitamin
D (25[OH]D), the best determinant of vitamin D status. Serum 25[OH]D is then
metabolized in the kidneys to 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25[OH]2D), the most
active form of vitamin D. Without vitamin D, less than 25% of dietary calcium
is absorbed. Parathyroid hormone (PTH) enhances renal tubular absorption of
calcium and stimulates the conversion of 25[OH]D to 1,25[OH]2D. PTH also
activates osteoblasts, which lay down new bone matrix, and indirectly stimulates
osteoclasts, which dissolve bone matrix.

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

639

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
In 2010, the Institute of Medicine (IOM) issued dietary intake recommendations
for calcium and vitamin D (see below).39 The IOM report concluded that serum
25[OH]D levels of 20 ng/mL are sufﬁcient to maintain bone health and warned
of potential adverse effects with levels above 50 ng/mL. The IOM reported insufﬁcient evidence to establish nutritional requirements based on studies of the beneﬁts of vitamin D relating to cardiovascular disease, cancer, diabetes, infections,
immune disorders, and other extraskeletal conditions. The USPSTF also cited
insufﬁcient evidence for determining whether beneﬁts outweighed the harms of
screening for vitamin D deﬁciency in asymptomatic adults (I statement).40
Based on review of randomized controlled trial data, the USPSTF also made
recommendations about vitamin D and calcium supplementation for the primary
prevention of fractures. They concluded that evidence was insufﬁcient to recommend supplementation in premenopausal women or men (I statement). Although
evidence for supplementation in postmenopausal women was similarly insufﬁcient, the USPSTF did advise against daily supplements <400 International Units
of vitamin D3 and <1,000 mg of calcium (grade D).41
Meta-analyses have suggested that calcium supplements for osteoporosis are associated with an increased risk for cardiovascular disease events, especially myocardial infarctions.42 However, several subsequent expert reviews concluded that
available evidence did not support a causal association between calcium supplements and cardiovascular disease risk; authors advised that individuals with
inadequate dietary calcium intake should use supplements to promote bone
health.43,44 Combined calcium and vitamin D supplementation is associated with
a slightly increased risk for kidney stones.41 No studies have reported harm associated with calcium intake from dietary sources.
Recommended Dietary Intakes of Calcium and
Vitamin D for Adults (Institute of Medicine 2010)
Age Group
19–50 yrs
51–70 yrs
Women
Men
71 and older

Calcium (Elemental) mg/d

Vitamin D IU/d

1,000

600

1,200
1,000
1,200

600
600
800

Source: Ross AC, Manson JE, Abrams SA, et al. The 2011 report on dietary reference intakes for calcium and vitamin D from the Institute of Medicine: what clinicians need to know. J Clin Endocrinol
Metab. 2011;96:53.

There are two main forms of calcium supplements, calcium carbonate and calcium citrate. Supplements contain variable amounts of elemental calcium.38
Patients can read these amounts on the Supplement Facts panel. Calcium carbonate is less expensive and should be consumed with food. Calcium citrate is
absorbed more easily in individuals with reduced levels of stomach acid and can
be taken with or without food. Calcium absorption depends on the total amount
consumed at one time—absorption diminishes at higher doses. Counsel patients
to take doses of 500 mg at two separate times each day. Vitamin D supplements
640

See Table 4-5, Nutrition Counseling:
Sources of Nutrients, p. 143, for food
sources of calcium and vitamin D.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
are available in two forms, D2 (ergocalciferol) and D3 (cholecalciferol); D3
increases serum 25(OH)D levels more effectively than D2.45
Antiresorptive and Anabolic Agents. Antiresorptive agents inhibit
osteoclast activity and slow bone remodeling, allowing better mineralization of
bone matrix and stabilization of the trabecular microarchitecture. These agents
include bisphosphonates, selective estrogen-receptor modulators (SERMs), calcitonin, and postmenopausal estrogen. Bisphosphonates are considered the ﬁrstline therapy for osteoporosis. Randomized placebo-controlled trials have shown
that bisphosphonates, SERMs, estrogen, calcitonin, and PTH signiﬁcantly reduce
risks for vertebral fractures in postmenopausal women; evidence is less conclusive for nonvertebral fractures, and there are no trial data for treating men.46
Estrogen therapy is now contraindicated due to associated risks of breast cancer
and vascular thrombosis.47 Bisphosphonates have been linked to rare risks of
osteonecrosis of the jaw and atypical femur fractures, and SERMs increase the
risk for thromboembolic events.46

See Chapter 14, Female Genitalia,
p. 582, for discussion of hormone
replacement therapy.

Anabolic agents such as PTH stimulate bone formation by acting primarily on
osteoblasts but require subcutaneous administration and monitoring for hypercalcemia. PTH is reserved for patients with severe osteoporosis (T scores < −3.5
or < −2.5 with a fragility fracture) or those who have failed or not tolerated other
therapies.48
Preventing Falls. More than one in three adults over age 65 years fall
each year. Falls are the leading cause of fatal and nonfatal injuries among older
adults and account for over $20 billion in direct clinical costs.49,50 Falls can
result in loss of independence in up to 30% of those suffering injuries that limit
their mobility. One third of community-dwelling adults will remain in a nursing home for at least 1 year following a hip fracture. Risk factors for falls include
increasing age, impaired gait and balance, postural hypotension, loss of
strength, medication use, comorbid illness, depression, cognitive impairment,
and visual deﬁcits.

See also Chapter 20, Assessing Older
Adults, for Further Assessment for
Preventing Falls, pp. 987–989.

Once injured, articular cartilage is
replaced by less resilient fibrocartilage, increasing risk of pain and OA.

The USPSTF gives a grade B recommendation for providing exercise or physical therapy and/or vitamin D supplementation to prevent falls among at-risk
community-dwelling adults ages ≥65 years.51 Effective exercise interventions
target balance, gait, and strength training. The USPSTF also recommends daily
vitamin D supplementation of 600 to 800 International Units; it found insufﬁcient evidence for or against interventions such as vision correction, discontinuing medications, education or counseling, and home hazard modiﬁcations.
However, poor lighting, stairs, chairs at awkward heights, slippery or irregular
surfaces, and ill-ﬁtting shoes are environmental hazards that are readily corrected. Work with your patients and their families to modify such risks whenever possible, and request home health assessments to target needed home
safety measures.

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

641

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS

Examination of Speciﬁc Joints:
Anatomy and Physiology and
Techniques of Examination
Steps for Examining the Joints
1. Inspect for joint symmetry, alignment, bony deformities, and swelling
2. Inspect and palpate surrounding tissues for skin changes, nodules, muscle
atrophy, tenderness
3. Assess range of motion and maneuvers to test joint function and stability
and the integrity of ligaments, tendons, bursae, especially if pain or trauma
4. Assess any areas of inﬂammation, especially tenderness, swelling, warmth,
redness

During the interview, the patient has shared his or her ability to carry out normal
activities of daily living. Keep the patient’s baseline level of function in mind as
you perform the musculoskeletal examination.
During the general survey, you have assessed the patient’s general appearance,
body proportions, and ease of movement. Now visualize the underlying anatomy
of the joints and recall pertinent elements of the history, for example, the mechanism of injury if there is trauma, or the time course of symptoms and limitations
in function in arthritis.
Your examination should be systematic. Include inspection, palpation of bony
structures and related joint and soft tissue structures, assessment of range of
motion, and special maneuvers to test speciﬁc movements. Recall that the anatomical shape of each joint determines its range of motion. There are two
phases to range of motion: active (by the patient) and passive (by the examiner).

If patients have painful joints, move them gently, or let the patients demonstrate
the movements themselves, showing you how they manage. For injured joints,
consider an x-ray before attempting movement.
Tips for Successful Examination of the
Musculoskeletal System
●

During inspection, look for symmetry of involvement. Is the change in joints
symmetric on both sides of the body, or is the change only in one or two joints?

Acute involvement of only one joint
suggests trauma, septic arthritis, or
crystalline arthritis. RA is typically
polyarticular and symmetrical.10,52–54

Note any deformities or malalignment of bones or joints.

Malalignment occurs in Dupuytren
contracture (p. 704), bow-legs (genu
varum) or knock-knees (genu valgum).

(continued )

642

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS

Tips for Successful Examination of the
Musculoskeletal System (continued )
●

●

●

Use inspection and palpation to assess the surrounding tissues, noting skin
changes, subcutaneous nodules, and muscle atrophy. Note any crepitus, an
audible or palpable crunching during movement of tendons or ligaments over
bone or areas of cartilage loss. This may occur in joints without pain but is
more signiﬁcant when associated with symptoms or signs.

Look for subcutaneous nodules in RA
or rheumatic fever; effusion in trauma;
crepitus over inflamed joints in OA or
over the inflamed tendon sheaths of
tenosynovitis.

Test range of motion and maneuvers (described for each joint) to demonstrate limitations in range of motion or joint instability from excess mobility of
joint ligaments, called ligamentous laxity.

Decreased range of motion is present
in arthritis, joints with tissue inflammation or surrounding fibrosis, or
bony fixation (ankylosis). Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) laxity occurs in
knee trauma; muscle atrophy and
weakness is seen in RA.

Finally, test muscle strength to aid in the assessment of joint function (for
these techniques, see Chapter 17, pp. 743–748).

The detail needed for examining joints varies widely. This section presents examination techniques for both comprehensive and targeted assessment of joint
function. Patients with extensive or severe musculoskeletal problems will require
more time.

See briefer examination techniques
for patients without joint symptoms
in Chapter 1, Overview: Physical
Examination and History Taking,
pp. 12–13, and Chapter 4, Beginning
the Examination: General Survey, Vital
Signs, and Pain, p. 122.

Review the ﬂowchart showing the Approach to Musculoskeletal Complaints
(Fig. 16-2, p. 627) to help organize your approach to the examination. Inspect
and palpate any joints with signs of inﬂammation.
Assessing the Four Signs of Inﬂammation
Swelling. Palpable swelling may involve: (1) the synovial membrane, which can
feel boggy or doughy; (2) eﬀusion from excess synovial ﬂuid within the joint
space; or (3) soft tissue structures, such as bursae, tendons, and tendon
sheaths.

Palpable bogginess or doughiness of
the synovial membrane indicates
synovitis, which is often accompanied
by effusion. Palpable joint fluid is
present in effusion, tenderness over
the tendon sheaths in tendinitis.

Warmth. Use the backs of your ﬁngers to compare the involved joint with
its unaﬀected contralateral joint, or with nearby tissues if both joints are
involved.
● Redness. Redness of the overlying skin is the least common sign of inﬂammation near the joints and is usually seen in more superﬁcial joints like ﬁngers,
toes, and knees.

Increased warmth is seen in arthritis,
tendinitis, bursitis, and osteomyelitis.

Pain or tenderness. Try to identify the speciﬁc anatomic structure that is
tender.

Diffuse tenderness and warmth over a
thickened synovium suggest arthritis
or infection; focal tenderness suggests
injury and trauma.

●

●

●

C H A P T E R 16

Redness over a tender joint suggests
septic or crystalline arthritis, or possibly RA.

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

643

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS

Temporomandibular Joint
Overview, Bony Structures,
and Joints. The temporomandibular joint (TMJ) is the
most active joint in the body,
opening and closing up to
2,000 times a day (Figs. 16-10
and 16-11). It is formed by the
fossa and articular tubercle of
the temporal bone and the condyle of the mandible. It lies
midway between the external
acoustic meatus and the zygomatic arch.
FIGURE 16-10.

Temporomandibular joint.

A ﬁbrocartilaginous disc cushions the action of the condyle of
the mandible against the synovial membrane and capsule of
the articulating surfaces of the
temporal bone. Therefore, it is a
condylar synovial joint.

Temporal bone
Zygomatic arch
Articular disc
External acoustic meatus
Condyle of mandible

Articular tubercle

FIGURE 16-11.

Temporomandibular joint, inset.

Muscle Groups and Additional Structures. The principal muscles
opening the mouth are the external pterygoids (Fig. 16-12). Closing the mouth are
the muscles innervated by cranial
nerve V, the trigeminal nerve—
the masseter, the temporalis, and
the internal pterygoids (see
Temporalis (cut)
p. 716).
Articular disc of
temporomandibular joint

External pterygoid
Internal pterygoid
Masseter (cut)

FIGURE 16-12.

644

TMJ muscles.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Techniques of Examination
Inspection and Palpation. Inspect the face for symmetry. Inspect the
TMJ for swelling or redness. Swelling may appear as a rounded bulge approximately 0.5 cm anterior to the external auditory meatus.

Facial asymmetry is seen in TMJ disorders, a category of orofacial pain with
multifactorial etiologies; typically,
there is unilateral chronic pain with
chewing, jaw clenching, or teeth grinding, often associated with stress and
accompanied by headache.55,56 Pain
with chewing also occurs in trigeminal
neuralgia and temporal arteritis.

To locate and palpate the joint, place
the tips of your index ﬁngers just in
front of the tragus of each ear and ask
the patient to open his or her mouth
(Fig. 16-13). The ﬁngertips should
drop into the joint spaces as the mouth
opens. Check for smooth range of
motion; note any swelling or tenderness. Snapping or clicking may be felt
or heard in normal people.

Swelling, tenderness, and decreased
range of motion signal TMJ inflammation or arthritis.
TMJ dislocation can be caused by
trauma.
Palpable crepitus or clicking is present in poor occlusion, meniscus injury,
or synovial swelling from trauma.

FIGURE 16-13.

Palpate the TMJ.

In TMJ syndrome, there is pain and
tenderness with palpation.

Palpate the muscles of mastication:
■ The masseters, externally at the angle of the mandible
■ The temporal muscles, externally during clenching and relaxation of the jaw
■ The pterygoid muscles, internally between the tonsillar pillars at the mandible

Range of Motion and Maneuvers. The TMJ has glide and hinge motions
in its upper and lower portions, respectively. Grinding or chewing consists primarily of gliding movements in the upper compartments.

Range of motion is threefold: ask the patient to demonstrate opening and closing,
protrusion and retraction (by jutting the mandible forward), and lateral, or sideto-side, motion. Normally, as the mouth is opened wide, three ﬁngers can be
inserted between the incisors. During normal protrusion of the jaw, the bottom
teeth can be placed in front of the upper teeth.

The Shoulder
Overview. The glenohumeral joint of the shoulder is distinguished by wideranging movement in all directions. This joint is largely uninhibited by bony
structures. The humeral head contacts less than one third of the surface area of
the glenoid fossa and essentially dangles from the scapula, attached by the joint

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

645

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

capsule, the intra-articular capsular ligaments, the glenoid labrum, and a
meshwork of muscles and tendons.

This muscular meshwork can make it
difficult to distinguish shoulder from
neck disorders.

The shoulder derives its mobility from a complex interconnected structure of
three joints, three large bones, and three principal muscle groups, often referred
to as the shoulder girdle. These structures are viewed as dynamic stabilizers, which
are capable of movement, or static stabilizers, which are incapable of movement.
■ Dynamic stabilizers: These consist of the SITS muscles of the rotator cuff (Supra-

spinatus, Infraspinatus, Teres minor, and Subscapularis), which move the
humerus and compress and stabilize the humeral head within the glenoid
cavity.
■ Static stabilizers: These are the bony structures of the shoulder girdle, the

labrum, the articular capsule, and the glenohumeral ligaments. The labrum
is a ﬁbrocartilaginous ring that surrounds the glenoid and deepens its socket,
providing greater stability to the humeral head. The joint capsule is strengthened by tendons of the rotator cuff and glenohumeral ligaments, adding to
joint stability.
Bony Structures. The bony structures of the shoulder include the
humerus, the clavicle, and the scapula (Fig. 16-14). The scapula is anchored to
the axial skeleton only by the sternoclavicular joint and inserting muscles, often
called the scapulothoracic articulation because it is not a true joint.
Acromioclavicular joint

Coracoid process
Clavicle
Sternoclavicular joint

Acromion

Greater tubercle
Bicipital groove
Lesser tubercle
Manubrium
Glenoid fossa

Humerus

Glenohumeral
joint
Scapula
(anterior surface)

F I G U R E 1 6 - 1 4 . Bony anatomy of the shoulder.

Identify the manubrium, the sternoclavicular joint, and the clavicle. Also identify
the tip of the acromion, the greater tubercle of the humerus, and the coracoid process,
which are important landmarks of shoulder anatomy.

646

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Joints.

Three different joints articulate at the shoulder:

■ The glenohumeral joint. In this joint, the head of the humerus articulates with

the shallow glenoid fossa of the scapula. This joint is deeply situated and
normally not palpable. It is a ball-and-socket joint, allowing the arm its wide
arc of movement—ﬂexion, extension, abduction (movement away from the
trunk), adduction (movement toward the trunk), rotation, and circumduction.
■ The sternoclavicular joint. The convex medial end of the clavicle articulates

with the concave hollow in the upper sternum.
■ The acromioclavicular joint. The lateral end of the clavicle articulates with the

acromion process of the scapula.
Muscle Groups. Three groups of muscles attach at the shoulder:
The Scapulohumeral Group. This group extends from the scapula to the
humerus and includes the muscles inserting directly on the humerus, namely the
SITS muscles of the rotator cuff:
■ Supraspinatus—runs above the glenohumeral joint; inserts on the greater

tubercle
■ Infraspinatus and teres minor—cross the glenohumeral joint posteriorly; insert

on the greater tubercle
■ Subscapularis (not illustrated)—originates on the anterior surface of the

scapula and crosses the joint anteriorly; inserts on the lesser tubercle
The scapulohumeral
group rotates the shoulder laterally (the rotator
cuff ) and depresses and
rotates the head of the
humerus (Fig. 16-15).
See pp. 653–654 for discussion of rotator cuff
injuries.

Axioscapular group
Scapulohumeral
group
Levator scapulae
Supraspinatus

Rhomboids

Infraspinatus

Trapezius

Deltoid

Teres
minor

Latissimus
dorsi
Posterior view

F I G U R E 1 6 - 1 5 . Scapulohumeral and axioscapular
groups.

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

647

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
The Axioscapular Group. This group attaches the scapula to the trunk
and includes the trapezius, rhomboids, serratus anterior, and levator scapulae
(Fig. 16-15). These muscles rotate the scapula and pull the shoulder posteriorly.
The Axiohumeral Group. This group attaches
the humerus to the trunk and includes the pectoralis
major and minor and the latissimus dorsi (Fig. 16-16).
These muscles rotate the shoulder internally.

Pectoralis
minor

Pectoralis
major

The biceps and triceps, which connect the scapula to
the bones of the forearm, are also involved in shoulder
movement, especially forward ﬂexion (biceps) and
extension (triceps).

Latissimus
dorsi

Anterior view

FIGURE 16-16.

Additional Structures. Also important to
shoulder movement are the articular capsule and bursae.
Surrounding the glenohumeral joint is a ﬁbrous
articular capsule formed by the tendon insertions of the
rotator cuff and other capsular structures. The loose ﬁt
of the capsule allows the shoulder bones to separate,
and contributes to the shoulder’s wide range of
movement. The capsule is lined by a synovial membrane
with two outpouchings—the subscapular bursa and the
synovial sheath of the tendon of the long head of the biceps.

Axiohumeral group.

Coracoid process
Acromion

Supraspinatus

Supraspinatus tendon
Subscapularis muscle
Subacromial bursa
Long head of
biceps tendon

To locate the biceps tendon, rotate your arm externally and
ﬁnd the tendinous cord that runs just medial to the greater
tubercle (Fig. 16-17). Roll it under your ﬁngers. This is the
tendon of the long head of the biceps. It runs in the bicipital groove between the greater and lesser tubercles.
The principal bursa of the shoulder is the subacromial
bursa, positioned between the acromion and the head of
the humerus and overlying the supraspinatus tendon.
Abduction of the shoulder compresses this bursa. Normally, the supraspinatus tendon and the subacromial
bursa are not palpable. However, if the bursal surfaces
are inﬂamed (subacromial bursitis), there may be tenderness just below the tip of the acromion, pain with
abduction and rotation, and loss of smooth movement.
648

FIGURE 16-17.

Anterior view of the shoulder.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Techniques of Examination
Inspection. Inspect the shoulder and shoulder girdle anteriorly, then the
scapulae and related muscles posteriorly.

Scoliosis may cause elevation of one
shoulder. With anterior dislocation
of the shoulder, the rounded lateral
aspect of the shoulder appears
flattened.57

Note any swelling, deformity, muscle atrophy or fasciculations (ﬁne tremors of the
muscles), or abnormal positioning.

Atrophy of the supraspinatus and
infraspinatus with increased
prominence of scapular spine can
appear within 2 to 3 weeks of a rotator
cuff tear; infraspinatus atrophy has a
positive likelihood ratio (LR) of 2 for
rotator cuff disease.58

Look for swelling of the joint capsule anteriorly or a bulge in the subacromial
bursa under the deltoid muscle. Survey the entire upper extremity for color
change, skin alteration, or unusual bony contours.

Swelling from synovial fluid accumulation is rare and must be significant
before the glenohumeral joint capsule appears distended. Swelling in
the acromioclavicular joint is easier to
detect as the joint is more superficial.

Palpation. Begin by palpating the bony contours and structures of the
shoulder, then palpate any area of pain.

See Table 16-4, Painful Shoulders,
pp. 700–701.

■ Beginning medially, at the sternoclavicular joint, trace the clavicle laterally

with your ﬁngers.
■ From behind, follow the bony spine

of the scapula laterally and upward
until it becomes the acromion (A), the
summit of the shoulder (Fig. 16-18).
Its upper surface is rough and slightly
convex. Identify the anterior tip of the
acromion.

A

B

C

F I G U R E 1 6 - 1 8 . Bony landmarks
of the shoulder.
■ With your index ﬁnger on top of the acromion, just behind its tip, press

medially with your thumb to ﬁnd the slightly elevated ridge that marks the
distal end of the clavicle at the acromioclavicular joint (shown by the arrow).
Move your thumb medially and down a short step to the next bony prominence, the coracoid process (B) of the scapula.
■ With your thumb on the coracoid process, allow your ﬁngers to fall on and

grasp the lateral aspect of the humerus to palpate the greater tubercle (C),
where the SITS muscles insert.
C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

649

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
■ Next, to palpate the biceps tendon in the intertubercular bicipital groove, keep

your thumb on the coracoid process and your ﬁngers on the lateral aspect of
the humerus (Fig. 16-19). Remove
your index ﬁnger and place it halfway
between the coracoid process and the
greater tubercle on the anterior surface of the arm. As you check for tendon tenderness, rolling the tendon
under the ﬁngertips may be helpful.
You can also rotate the glenohumeral
joint externally, locate the muscle distally near the elbow, and track the
muscle and its tendon proximally F I G U R E 1 6 - 1 9 . Palpate the
bicipital groove and tendon.
into the intertubercular groove.
■ To examine the subacromial and subdeltoid bursae and the SITS muscles, ﬁrst

passively extend the humerus by lifting the elbow posteriorly, which rotates
these structures so that they are anterior to the acromion. Palpate carefully
over the subacromial and subdeltoid bursae (Figs. 16-20 and 16-21). The
underlying palpable SITS muscles are:

See also Bicipital Tendinitis in Table 16-4,
Painful Shoulders, pp. 700–701.

Localized tenderness points to subacromial or subdeltoid bursitis, degenerative changes, or calcific deposits in
the rotator cuff. Swelling suggests a
bursal tear that communicates with
the articular cavity.

Subacromial bursa

Rotator cuff

F I G U R E 1 6 - 2 0 . Extend the
humerus posteriorly.

Tenderness over the SITS muscle
insertions and inability to abduct the
arm above shoulder level occurs in
sprains, tears, and tendon rupture of
the rotator cuff, most commonly the
supraspinatus. See Table 16-4, Painful
Shoulders, pp. 700–701.

F I G U R E 1 6 - 2 1 . Palpate the
subacromial bursa.

■ Supraspinatus—directly under the acromion
■ Infraspinatus—posterior to supraspinatus
■ Teres minor—posterior and inferior to the supraspinatus
■ Subscapularis—inserts anteriorly and is not palpable
■ The ﬁbrous articular capsule and the broad ﬂat tendons of the rotator cuff are

so closely associated that they must be examined simultaneously. Swelling in
the capsule and synovial membrane is often best detected by looking down
on the shoulder from above. Palpate the capsule and synovial membrane
beneath the anterior and posterior acromion to check for injury or arthritis.

650

Tenderness and effusion suggest glenohumeral joint synovitis. If the margins
of the capsule and synovial membrane
are palpable, a moderate to large effusion is present; minimal synovitis cannot be detected on palpation.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Range of Motion and Maneuvers
Range of Motion. The six motions of the shoulder girdle are flexion, extension, abduction, adduction, and internal and external rotation.

Restricted range of motion occurs in
bursitis, capsulitis, rotator cuff tears or
sprains, and tendinitis.

Standing in front of the patient, watch for smooth ﬂuid movement as the patient
performs the motions listed in the table below. Learn the speciﬁc muscles responsible for each motion. Note the clear simple instructions that prompt the
requested patient response. Test muscle strength.
Shoulder Girdle Range of Motion
Flexion

Extension
180º

180º

0º

0º

90º

60º

Principal Muscles Aﬀecting Movement Principal Muscles Aﬀecting Movement
Anterior deltoid, pectoralis major (clavicu- Latissimus dorsi, teres major, posterior
lar head), coracobrachialis, biceps brachii
deltoid, triceps brachii (long head)
Patient Instructions
“Raise your arms in front of you and overhead.”
Abduction

Patient Instructions
“Raise your arms behind you.”
Note that to test pure glenohumeral
motion, the patient should raise the
arms to shoulder level at 90°, with
palms facing down. To test scapulothoracic motion, the patient should
turn the palms up and raise the arms
an additional 60°. The final 30° tests
combined glenohumeral and scapulothoracic motion.

Adduction
180º

90º

0º

Principal Muscles Aﬀecting Movement
Supraspinatus, middle deltoid, serratus
anterior (via upward rotation of the
scapula)

Principal Muscles Aﬀecting Movement
Pectoralis major, coracobrachialis, latissimus dorsi, teres major, subscapularis

Patient Instructions
“Raise your arms out to the side and overhead.”

Patient Instructions
“Cross your arm in front of your body.”
(continued )

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

651

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS

Shoulder Girdle Range of Motion (continued )
Internal Rotation

External Rotation

90º

Principal Muscles Aﬀecting Movement Principal Muscles Aﬀecting Movement
Subscapularis, anterior deltoid, pectoralis Infraspinatus, teres minor, posterior
deltoid
major, teres major, latissimus dorsi
Patient Instructions
Patient Instructions
“Raise your arm to shoulder level; bend
“Place one hand behind your back and
your elbow and rotate your forearm
touch your shoulder blade.”
toward the ceiling.” OR
Identify the highest midline spinous pro“Place one hand behind your neck or head
cess the patient is able to reach.
as if you are brushing your hair.”

Maneuvers. The examination of the shoulder often requires evaluation
of specific motions and structures. There are more than 150 different maneuvers for testing shoulder function, but few are well studied. Common recommended maneuvers based on available evidence and analyses from three recent
reviews58–60 are described on pp. 653–655. Although performing these maneuvers takes supervision and practice, they increase the likelihood of identifying
shoulder pathology.

Rotator cuff disorders are the most common cause of shoulder pain in primary
care. Compression of the rotator cuff muscles and tendons between the head of
the humerus and the acromion causes “impingement signs” or pain during
shoulder movement. Five maneuvers that have the best LRs and the narrowest
conﬁdence intervals are currently recommended:58–60 one pain provocation
test, three strength tests, and one composite test. In composite tests, the
patient experiences either pain or weakness during the maneuver. Most of
the data on these tests come from specialty practice settings but remain useful
for general care.
■ Pain provocation test: painful arc test (subacromial bursa and rotator cuff). This test

has a positive LR of 3.7, which is the highest of all the rotator cuff maneuvers.
It also has the best negative LR, 0.36, for ruling out rotator cuff disorders. Other
common pain provocation tests are the Neer and Hawkins tests, also included
in the box on next page, although their positive LRs are <2, so they are less
diagnostic.

652

An age of ≥60 years and a positive
drop-arm test are the findings most
likely to identify a degenerative rotator cuff tear, with positive LRs of 3.2
and 2.9 to 5.0, respectively. The combined findings of supraspinatus weakness, infraspinatus weakness, and a
positive impingement sign increase
the LR of a tear to 48.0; when all three
are absent, the LR falls to 0.02, virtually
ruling out the diagnosis.57,61

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
■ Strength tests: internal rotation lag test (subscapularis), external rotation lag test

(supraspinatus and infraspinatus), and drop arm test (supraspinatus). These tests
have positive LRs of 7.2, 5.6, and 3.3, respectively.
■ Composite test: external rotation resistance test (infraspinatus). This test has

a positive LR of 2.6. Another common composite test is the empty can
test.
Maneuvers for Examining the Shoulder
Structure57–60

Maneuver/
Type of Test

Acromioclavicular
Joint

Crossover or crossed body
adduction test. Adduct
the patient’s arm
across the chest.

Overall Shoulder
Rotation

Apley scratch test. Ask the patient to touch the opposite
scapula using the two motions shown below.

Pain with adduction is a positive test,
with a positive LR of 3.7. Acromioclavicular joint tenderness and compression tenderness have low LRs so are
not diagnostically helpful.57

Pain during these maneuvers
suggests a rotator cuff disorder or
adhesive capsulitis.

Tests abduction and
external rotation.
Rotator Cuﬀ
Pain Provocation
Tests

Tests adduction and internal
rotation.
Shoulder pain from 60° to 120° is
a positive test for a subacromial
impingement/rotator cuff tendinitis
disorder, with a positive LR 3.7 and a
helpful negative LR of 0.36.

180º

Painful arc test. Fully
adduct the patient’s
arm from 0° to 180°.

120º
No pain

Subacromial
pain

90º
Subacromial
pain

60º

No pain

0º
(continued )

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

653

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS

Maneuvers for Examining the Shoulder (continued )
Structure57–60

Strength Tests

Maneuver/
Type of Test
Neer impingement sign.
Press on the scapula to
prevent scapular
motion with one hand,
and raise the patient’s
arm with the other.
This compresses the
greater tuberosity of
the humerus against
the acromion.

Pain during this maneuver is a positive
test for a subacromial impingement/
rotator cuff tendinitis disorder, with a
positive LR ∼1.0 to 1.6.

Hawkins impingement
sign. Flex the patient’s
shoulder and elbow to
90° with the palm facing down. Then, with
one hand on the forearm and one on the
arm, rotate the arm
internally. This compresses the greater
tuberosity against the
supraspinatus tendon
and coracoacromial
ligament.

Pain during this maneuver is a positive
test for supraspinatus impingement/
rotator cuff tendinitis, with a positive
LR of ∼1.5. When both the Hawkins and
Neer signs are absent, the negative LR
is helpful at 0.1.

External rotation lag test.
With the patient’s arm
ﬂexed to 90° with
palm up, rotate the
arm into full external
rotation.

Inability of the patient to maintain
external rotation is a positive test for
supraspinatus and infraspinatus disorders, with a positive LR of 7.2.
90º
flexion

20º
abduction

(continued )

654

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS

Maneuvers for Examining the Shoulder (continued )
Structure57–60

Maneuver/
Type of Test
Internal rotation lag test.
Ask the patient to
place the dorsum of
the hand on the low
back with the elbow
ﬂexed to 90°. Then you
lift the hand oﬀ the
back, which further
internally rotates the
shoulder. Ask the
patient to keep the
hand in this position.

Composite tests

Inability of the patient to hold the
hand in this position is positive test for
a subscapularis disorder, with a positive LR of 5.6 to 6.2 and an excellent
negative LR of 0.04.

90º
flexion

Drop-arm test. Ask the
patient to fully abduct
the arm to shoulder
level, up to 90°, and
lower it slowly. Note
that abduction above
shoulder level, from
90° to 120°, reﬂects
action of the deltoid
muscle.

Weakness during this maneuver is a
positive test for a supraspinatus rotator cuff tear or bicipital tendinitis,
with a positive LR of 3.3.

External rotation resistance test. Ask the
patient to adduct and
ﬂex the arm to 90°,
with the thumbs
turned up. Stabilize
the elbow with one
hand and apply pressure proximal to the
patient’s wrist as the
patient presses the
wrist outward in external rotation.

Pain or weakness during this maneuver is a positive test for an infraspinatus disorder, with a positive LR of 2.6
and negative LR of 0.49. Limited
external rotation points to glenohumeral disease or adhesive capsulitis.

Empty can test. Elevate
the arms to 90° and
internally rotate the
arms with the thumbs
pointing down, as if
emptying a can. Ask
the patient to resist as
you place downward
pressure on the arms.

Inability of the patient to hold the arm
fully abducted at shoulder level or
control lowering the arm is a positive
test for a suprasinatus rotator cuff
tear, with a positive LR of 1.3.

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

655

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS

The Elbow
Overview, Bony Structures, and
Joints. The elbow helps position the hand in
space and stabilizes the lever action of the forearm.
The elbow joint is formed by the humerus and the
two bones of the forearm, the radius and the ulna
(Fig. 16-22). Identify the medial and lateral
epicondyles of the humerus and the olecranon
process of the ulna.

Humerus

Lateral epicondyle

Medial epicondyle
Radiohumeral
joint
Humeroulnar joint
Radioulnar joint
Supinator

These bones have three articulations: the humeroulnar joint, the radiohumeral joint, and the
radioulnar joint. All three share a large common
articular cavity and an extensive synovial lining.

Pronator teres
Brachioradialis

Ulna
Radius

F I G U R E 1 6 - 2 2 . Left anterior elbow.

Muscle Groups and Additional
Structures. Muscles traversing the elbow
include the biceps and brachioradialis (ﬂexion),
the brachialis, the triceps (extension), the pronator
teres (pronation), and the supinator (supination).

Note the location of the olecranon bursa between
the olecranon process and the skin (Fig. 16-23).
The bursa is not normally palpable but swells
and becomes tender when inﬂamed. The ulnar
nerve runs posteriorly in the ulnar groove
between the medial epicondyle and the olecranon process. The radial nerve is adjacent to the
lateral epicondyle. On the ventral forearm, the
median nerve is just medial to the brachial artery
in the antecubital fossa.

Ulnar nerve
Synovial
membrane
(distended)

Olecranon process

Medial epicondyle

Radial nerve
Olecranon bursa

F I G U R E 1 6 - 2 3 . Left posterior elbow.

Techniques of Examination
Inspection. Support the patient’s forearm with your opposite hand so
that the elbow is ﬂexed to about 70°. Identify the medial and lateral epicondyles and the olecranon process of the ulna. Inspect the contours of the elbow,
including the extensor surface of the ulna and the olecranon process. Note any
nodules or swelling.

656

See Table 16-5, Swollen or Tender
Elbows, p. 702.
Swelling over the olecranon process is
suspicious for olecranon bursitis (see
p. 702); inflammation or synovial fluid
suggests arthritis.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Palpation. Palpate the olecranon
process and press over the epicondyles for
tenderness (Fig. 16-24).

Tenderness distal to the epicondyle is
common in lateral epicondylitis (tennis
elbow) and less common in medial
epicondylitis (pitcher’s or golfer’s
elbow).

Palpate the grooves between the epicondyles and the olecranon process, where the
synovium is most easily examined. Normally the synovium and olecranon bursae
are not palpable.
The sensitive ulnar nerve can be palpated
posteriorly between the olecranon process
and the medial epicondyle.

FIGURE 16-24.
epicondyles.

Palpate the

Note any displacement of the olecranon process (Figs. 16-25 and 16-26).

The olecranon is displaced posteriorly
in posterior dislocation of the elbow
and supracondylar fracture.

F I G U R E 1 6 - 2 6 . Supracondylar
fracture of the elbow.

F I G U R E 1 6 - 2 5 . Posterior
dislocation of the elbow.

Range of Motion and Maneuvers. Range of motion includes ﬂexion
and extension at the elbow and pronation and supination of the forearm, which
also move the wrist and hand (Fig. 16-27). In the box below, note the speciﬁc
muscles responsible for each motion and the instructions to the patient.

o°

Supination

Pronation

Elbow Range of Motion
Elbow
Movement

Primary Muscles
Affecting Movement

Flexion

Biceps brachii, brachialis,
brachioradialis
Triceps brachii, anconeus
Biceps brachii, supinator

Extension
Supination
Pronation

Pronator teres, pronator
quadratus

Patient Instructions
“Bend your elbow.”

F I G U R E 1 6 - 2 7 . Elbow supination
and pronation.

“Straighten your elbow.”
“Turn your palms up, as if
carrying a bowl of soup.”
“Turn your palms down.”

After injury, preservation of active
range of motion and full elbow extension makes fracture highly unlikely. Full
elbow extension has a sensitivity of
84% to >98% and specificity of 48% to
>97% for absence of fracture.62,63 Tenderness over the radial head, olecranon,
or medial epicondyle and bruising, plus
absent elbow extension, may improve
these test characteristics.64 Full elbow
extension also makes intra-articular
effusion or hemarthrosis unlikely.

The Wrist and Hands
Overview. The wrist and hands form a complex unit of small highly active
joints used almost continuously during waking hours. There is little protection
from overlying soft tissue, increasing vulnerability to trauma and disability.
C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

657

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Bony Structures. The wrist includes
the distal radius and ulna and eight small
carpal bones (Fig. 16-28). At the wrist,
identify the bony tips of the radius and the
ulna.

Identify the carpal bones distal to the wrist
joint, each of the ﬁve metacarpals, and the
proximal, middle, and distal phalanges.
Note that the thumb has only two phalanges.

Distal
interphalangeal
joint (DIP)
Proximal
interphalangeal
joint (PIP)

Phalanges

Metacarpophalangeal
joint (MCP)

Metacarpal
Hamate
Trapezoid

Carpal

Trapezium

Triquetrum

Capitate

Lunate

Scaphoid
Ulna

Radius

FIGURE 16-28.

Bones of the wrist and hand.

Joints. The numerous joints of the
wrist and hand make the hands unusually
dextrous.
■ Wrist joints. The wrist joints include the

radiocarpal or wrist joint, the distal
radioulnar joint, and the intercarpal
joints (Fig. 16-29). The joint capsule,
articular disc, and synovial membrane
of the wrist join the radius to the ulna
and to the proximal carpal bones. On
the dorsum of the wrist, locate the
groove of the radiocarpal joint. This
joint provides most of the ﬂexion and
extension at the wrist because the ulna
does not articulate directly with the
carpal bones.

Intercarpal
joints
Radiocarpal
joint

F I G U R E 1 6 - 2 9 . Joints of the wrist.

■ Hand joints. The joints of the hand in-

Metacarpophalangeal
joint

clude the metacarpophalangeal joints
(MCPs), the proximal interphalangeal
joints (PIPs), and the distal interphalangeal joints (DIPs). Flex the hand and
ﬁnd the groove marking the MCP joint
of each ﬁnger (Fig. 16-30). It is distal
to the knuckle and is best felt on either
side of the extensor tendon.

Degenerative changes at the first carpometacarpal joint of the thumb are
more common in women.
FIGURE 16-30.

658

Distal
radioulnar
joint

Metacarpophalangeal joint.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Muscle Groups. Wrist ﬂexion arises from the two carpal muscles, located
on the radial and ulnar surfaces. Two radial and one ulnar muscle provide wrist
extension. Supination and pronation are powered by muscle contraction in the
forearm.

The thumb is powered by three muscles that form the thenar eminence and
provide ﬂexion, abduction, and opposition. The muscles of extension are at the
base of the thumb along the radial margin. Movement in the digits depends on
action of the ﬂexor and extensor tendons of muscles in the forearm and wrist.
The intrinsic muscles of the hand attaching to the metacarpal bones are involved
in ﬂexion (lumbricals), abduction (dorsal interossei), and adduction (palmar interossei) of the ﬁngers.
Additional Structures. Soft tissue structures, especially tendons and
tendon sheaths, are especially important to movement of the wrist and hand.
Six extensor tendons and two ﬂexor tendons pass across the wrist and hand to
insert on the ﬁngers. Through much of their course these tendons travel in
tunnel-like sheaths, generally palpable only when swollen or inﬂamed.

Be familiar with the structures of the
carpal tunnel, a channel beneath the
palmar surface of the wrist and proximal hand (Fig. 16-31). The channel
contains the sheath and ﬂexor tendons of the forearm muscles and the
median nerve.
Holding the tendons and tendon
sheath in place is a transverse ligament, the ﬂexor retinaculum. The
median nerve lies between the ﬂexor
retinaculum and the tendon sheath.
The median nerve provides sensation to the palm and the palmar surface of most of the thumb, the second
and third digits, and half of the
fourth digit. It also innervates the
thumb muscles of ﬂexion, abduction, and opposition.

Flexor retinaculum
Carpal tunnel
Median nerve

FIGURE 16-31.

The carpal tunnel.

Techniques of Examination
Inspection. Inspect the position of the hands in motion for smooth natural movement. When the ﬁngers are relaxed they should be slightly ﬂexed; the
ﬁngernail edges should be in parallel.

C H A P T E R 16

Guarded movement suggests injury.
Flexor tendon damage causes abnormal finger alignment.

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

659

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Inspect the palmar and dorsal surfaces of the wrist and hand carefully for swelling over the joints or signs of trauma.

Diffuse swelling is common in arthritis or
infection; local swelling suggests a ganglion. Laceration, puncture, injection
marks, burn, or erythema result from
trauma. See Table 16-6, Arthritis in the
Hands, p. 703, and Table 16-7, Swellings
and Deformities of the Hands, p. 704.

Note any deformities of the wrist, hand, or ﬁnger bones, as well as any angulation.

Heberden nodes (DIP joints) and
Bouchard nodes (PIP joints) are common findings in OA. In RA, inspect for
symmetric deformity in the PIP, MCP,
and wrist joints; later, there is MCP
subluxation and ulnar deviation.

Observe the contours of the palm, namely the thenar and hypothenar eminences.

Thenar atrophy occurs in median
nerve compression from carpal tunnel
syndrome (sensitivity <50%; specificity
>82% to 99%)65; in ulnar nerve compression, there is hypothenar atrophy.

Note any thickening of the ﬂexor tendons or ﬂexion contractures in the ﬁngers.

Dupuytren flexion contractures in the
third, ring, and fifth fingers, arise from
thickening of the palmar fascia (see
p. 704). Trigger digits are caused by
stenosing tenosynovitis.66

Palpation. At the wrist, palpate
the distal radius and ulna on the lateral and medial surfaces (Fig. 16-32).
Palpate the groove of each wrist joint
with your thumbs on the dorsum of
the wrist, your ﬁngers beneath it. Note
any swelling, bogginess, or tenderness.

Tenderness over the distal radius after
a fall is suspicious for a Colles fracture.
Bony step-offs also suggest fracture.
In RA, there is persisting bilateral
swelling and/or tenderness.

FIGURE 16-32.
joint.

660

Palpate the wrist

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Palpate the radial styloid bone and the
anatomic snuffbox, a hollowed depression
just distal to the radial styloid process
formed by the abductor and extensor
muscles of the thumb (Fig. 16-33). The
“snuffbox” is more visible with lateral
extension of the thumb away from the
hand (abduction).

Tenderness over the extensor and
abductor tendons of the thumb at the
radial styloid occurs in de Quervain
tenosynovitis and gonococcal tenosynovitis. See Table 16-8, Tendon
Sheath, Palmar Space, and Finger
Infections, p. 705.

F I G U R E 1 6 - 3 3 . Palpate the
anatomic snuffbox.

Palpate the eight carpal bones lying distal
to the wrist joint, and then each of the
ﬁve metacarpals and the proximal, middle, and distal phalanges (Fig. 16-34).

“Snuffbox” tenderness with the wrist in
ulnar deviation and pain at the scaphoid tubercle are suspicious for occult
scaphoid fracture, a common injury.67
Poor blood supply increases risk of
scaphoid bone avascular necrosis.
The MCPs are often boggy or tender
in RA, but are rarely involved in OA.
Pain with compression also occurs in
posttraumatic arthritis.

Palpate any other area where you suspect an abnormality.
Compress the MCP joints by squeezing the hand from each side between
the thumb and ﬁngers. Alternatively,
use your thumb to palpate each MCP
joint just distal to and on each side of F I G U R E 1 6 - 3 4 .
the extensor tendons as your index ﬁn- joints.
ger feels the head of the metacarpal in
the palm. Note any swelling, bogginess, or tenderness.

Palpate the MCP

Now examine the ﬁngers and thumb. Palpate the medial and lateral aspects of
each PIP joint between your thumb and index ﬁnger, again checking for swelling,
bogginess, bony enlargement, or tenderness.

There are PIP changes in RA; Bouchard
nodes in OA. Pain at the base of the
thumb occurs in carpometacarpal
arthritis.

Using the same techniques, examine
the DIP joints (Fig. 16-36).

F I G U R E 1 6 - 3 6 . Palpate the DIP
joints.

F I G U R E 1 6 - 3 5 . Heberden nodes.

C H A P T E R 16

Hard dorsolateral nodules on the DIP
joints, or Heberden nodes (Fig. 16-35),
are common in OA; the DIP joints are
also involved in psoriatic arthritis.

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

661

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

In any area of swelling or inﬂammation, palpate along the tendons inserting on
the thumb and ﬁngers.

Tenderness and swelling occur in
tenosynovitis, or inflammation of the
tendon sheaths. De Quervain tenosynovitis involves the extensor and
abductor tendons of the thumb as
they cross the radial styloid. See
Table 16-8, Tendon Sheath, Palmar
Space, and Finger Infections, p. 706.

Wrists: Range of Motion and Maneuvers
Range of Motion. Refer to the table below for specific muscles responsible
for each movement and use clear instructions that prompt the patient to properly follow your directions. For techniques of testing wrist muscle strength, turn
to Chapter 17, The Nervous System, pp. 743–746.

Wrist Range of Motion
Wrist
Movement

Primary Muscles
Affecting Movement

Flexion

Flexor carpi radialis, ﬂexor
carpi ulnaris
Extensor carpi ulnaris,
extensor carpi radialis
longus, extensor carpi
radialis brevis
Flexor carpi ulnaris

Extension

Adduction (radial
deviation)
Abduction (ulnar
deviation)

Patient Instructions

Flexor carpi radialis

“With palms down, point your
ﬁngers toward the ﬂoor.”
“With palms down, point your
ﬁngers toward the ceiling.”

Arthritis, tenosynovitis, and Dupuytren
contracture all impair range of motion
(Figs. 16-37 and 16-38). See Table 16-7,
Swellings and Deformities of the
Hands, p. 704.

“With palms down, bring your
ﬁngers toward the midline.”
“With palms down, bring your
ﬁngers away from the
midline.”

See p. 659 for discussion of pronation
and supination, which also involve
the wrist and hand.

Radial
deviation

0°

20°

Ulnar
deviation

30°

70° Extension

0°

90°

90°

70° Flexion

FIGURE 16-37.
and extension.

662

Hand ﬂexion

FIGURE 16-38.
ulnar deviation.

Radial and

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Maneuvers. Maneuvers for assessing conditions at the wrist are listed on
the next page. For complaints of nocturnal hand or arm numbness (paresthesias), dropping objects, inability to twist lids off jars, aching at the wrist or
even the forearm, and numbness of the ﬁrst three digits, test for carpal tunnel
syndrome, the most common entrapment neuropathy, involving compression
of the median nerve. Learn the distribution of the median, radial, and ulnar
nerve innervations of the wrist and hand (Figs. 16-39 and 16-40). Remember
to assess more proximal causes of wrist and hand pain arising from cervical
radiculopathy.

Forceful repetitive handwork with
wrist flexion such as keyboarding or
mail sorting, vibration, cold environments, wrist anatomy, pregnancy, RA,
diabetes, and hypothyroidism are risk
factors for carpal tunnel syndrome.

Median nerve
Median nerve

Ulnar
nerve

Ulnar
nerve
Radial nerve

Radial nerve

FIGURE 16-39.

Dorsal surface.

F I G U R E 1 6 - 4 0 . Volar surface.

You can test sensation as follows:
■ Pulp of the index ﬁnger—median nerve

Decreased sensation in the median
nerve territory is a common sign of
carpal tunnel syndrome (sensitivity to
pinprick and two-point discrimination
<50%; specificity >85%; positive LR of
hypalgesia is 3.1).67,68

■ Pulp of the ﬁfth ﬁnger—ulnar nerve
■ Dorsal web space of the thumb and index ﬁnger—radial nerve

Hand Grip. Test hand grip strength by asking the patient to grasp your second and third
ﬁngers (Fig. 16-41). This tests function of wrist
joints, the ﬁnger ﬂexors, and the intrinsic muscles and joints of the hand.

Decreased grip strength is a positive
test for weakness of the finger flexors
and/or intrinsic muscles of the hand.
It also results from inflammatory or
degenerative arthritis, carpal tunnel
syndrome, epicondylitis, and cervical
radiculopathy. Grip weakness plus
wrist pain are often present in de
Quervain tenosynovitis.
FIGURE 16-41.
grip strength.

Test

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

663

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Thumb Movement. To test thumb
function, ask the patient to grasp the
thumb against the palm and then move
the wrist toward the midline in ulnar deviation (sometimes called the Finkelstein
test), as shown in Figure 16-42.

Pain during this maneuver identifies
de Quervain tenosynovitis from inflammation of the abductor pollicis longus
and extensor pollicis brevis tendons
and tendon sheaths.

Tendon

FIGURE 16-42.
thumb function.

Test

Weakness on thumb abduction is a
positive test. The abductor pollicis
longus is innervated only by the
median nerve.

Carpal Tunnel Syndrome—Thumb Abduction, Tinel Test, and Phalen Test for Median Nerve Compression. To test thumb

abduction, ask the patient to raise the
thumb straight up as you apply downward resistance (Fig. 16-43).

FIGURE 16-43.
thumb abduction.

Test

Test Tinel sign by tapping lightly over the
course of the median nerve in the carpal
tunnel as shown in Figure 16-44.

Aching and numbness in the median
nerve distribution is a positive test
(sensitivity 23% to 60%; specificity
64% to 91%; LR ≤1.5).68

FIGURE 16-44.

Test Tinel sign.

To test Phalen sign, ask the patient to hold
the wrists in ﬂexion for 60 seconds with the
elbows fully extended (Fig. 16-45). Alternatively, ask the patient to press the backs
of both hands together to form right angles.
These maneuvers compress the median
nerve.

Numbness and tingling in the median
nerve distribution within 60 seconds
is a positive test (sensitivity 10% to
91%; specificity 33% to 86%; LR
≤1.5).68

F I G U R E 1 6 - 4 5 . Test Phalen sign.

664

Combined use of a hand symptom
diagram, median nerve territory
hypalgesia, and thumb abduction
weakness are most consistent with
nerve conduction diagnoses of carpal
tunnel syndrome.67,69

Tinel and Phalen signs do not reliably
predict positive electrodiagnosis of
carpal tunnel disease.69

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Fingers and Thumbs: Range of Motion and Maneuvers
Range of Motion—Fingers.

Assess flexion, extension, abduction, and adduc-

tion of the fingers.
■ Flexion and extension (Fig. 16-46). For ﬂexion,

to test the lumbricals and ﬁnger ﬂexor muscles, ask the patient to “Make a tight ﬁst with
each hand, thumb across the knuckles.” For extension, to test the ﬁnger extensor muscles,
ask the patient to “Extend and spread the ﬁngers.” At the MCPs, the ﬁngers may extend
beyond the neutral position.
Test the ﬂexion and extension of the PIP and
DIP joints (lumbrical muscles). The ﬁngers
should open and close easily.

FIGURE 16-46.
ﬁnger ﬂexion.

Test

■ Abduction and adduction (Fig. 16-47). Ask the

Inspect for impaired hand movement
in arthritis, trigger finger, and Dupuytren contracture.

patient to spread the ﬁngers apart (abduction
from dorsal interossei) and back together (adduction from palmar interossei). Check for
smooth, coordinated movement.

FIGURE 16-47.
ﬁnger abduction.

Test

Thumbs. At the thumb, assess flexion, extension, abduction, adduction, and
opposition (Figs. 16-48 to 16-51). Each of these movements is powered by a
related muscle of the thumb.

F I G U R E 1 6 - 4 8 . Flexion.

FIGURE 16-49.

Extension.

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

665

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS

FIGURE 16-50.
adduction.

Abduction and

FIGURE 16-51.

Opposition.

Ask the patient to move the thumb across the palm and touch the base of the ﬁfth
ﬁnger to test ﬂexion, and then to move the thumb back across the palm and away
from the ﬁngers to test extension.
Next, ask the patient to place the ﬁngers and thumb in the neutral position with
the palm up, then have the patient move the thumb anteriorly away from the
palm to assess abduction and back down for adduction. To test opposition, or
movements of the thumb across the palm, ask the patient to touch the thumb to
each of the other ﬁngertips.
A full examination of the wrist and hand involves detailed testing of muscle
strength and sensation, found in Chapter 17, The Nervous System, pp. 743–748.

The Spine
Overview. The vertebral column, or spine, is the central supporting structure
of the trunk and back. The concave curves of the cervical and lumbar spine and
the convex curves of the thoracic and sacrococcygeal spine help distribute upper
body weight to the pelvis and lower extremities and cushion the concussive
impact of walking or running.

The complex mechanics of the back reﬂect the coordinated action of:
■ The vertebrae and intervertebral discs
■ An interconnecting system of ligaments between anterior vertebrae and pos-

terior vertebrae, ligaments between the spinous processes, and ligaments
between the lamina of two adjacent vertebrae
■ Large superﬁcial muscles, deeper intrinsic muscles, and muscles of the ab-

dominal wall

666

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Bony Structures. The vertebral
column contains 24 vertebrae stacked
on the sacrum and coccyx. A typical
vertebra contains sites for joint
articulations, weight bearing, and
muscle attachments, as well as
foramina for the spinal nerve roots
and peripheral nerves. Anteriorly, the
vertebral body supports weight
bearing. The posterior vertebral arch
encloses the spinal cord. Review the
location of the vertebral processes
and foramina, with particular
attention to:

Representative Cervical and Lumbar Vertebrae
C4–C5 Coronal and Lateral Views
Vertebral
body
Transverse
foramen

Pedicle
Superior articular facet
Vertebral
foramen

Vertebral arch
Lamina

Spinous
process

Superior articular process

■ The spinous process projecting pos-

teriorly in the midline and the two
transverse processes at the junction of the pedicle and the lamina.
Muscles attach at these processes.

Transverse process

Transverse process
Intervertebral foramen
C4
Spinous process

■ The articular processes—two on

each side of the vertebra, one facing up and one facing down, at
the junction of the pedicles and
laminae, often called articular
facets.
■ The vertebral foramen, which en-

closes the spinal cord, the intervertebral foramen, formed by the
inferior and superior articulating
process of adjacent vertebrae,
creating a channel for the spinal
nerve roots; and in the cervical
vertebrae, the transverse foramen
for the vertebral artery.

C5

T12–L1 Coronal and Lateral Views

Pedicle
Vertebral
foramen
Lamina
Transverse process
Superior articular
process

Intervertebral foramen
T12
Superior articular process
L1

Inferior articular process

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

667

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
The proximity of the spinal cord and spinal nerve roots to their bony vertebral
casing and the intervertebral discs makes them especially vulnerable to disc
herniation, impingement from degenerative changes in the vertebrae and facets,
and trauma.
Joints. The spine has slightly movable cartilaginous joints between the
vertebral bodies and between the articular facets. Between the vertebral bodies
are the intervertebral discs, each consisting of a soft mucoid central core, the
nucleus pulposus, rimmed by the tough ﬁbrous tissue of the annulus ﬁbrosis. The
intervertebral discs cushion movement between vertebrae and allow the vertebral
column to curve, ﬂex, and bend. The ﬂexibility of the spine is largely determined
by the angle of the articular facet joints relative to the plane of the vertebral body,
and varies at different levels of the spine. Note that the vertebral column angles
sharply posterior at the lumbosacral junction and becomes immovable. The
mechanical stress at this angulation contributes to the risk for disc herniation
and subluxation, or slippage (spondylolisthesis), of L5 on S1.
Muscle Groups. The trapezius
and latissimus dorsi form the large
outer layer of muscles attaching to
each side of the spine (Fig. 16-52).
They overlie two deeper muscle
layers—a layer attaching to the head,
neck, and spinous processes (splenius
capitis, splenius cervicis, and
sacrospinalis) and a layer of smaller
intrinsic muscles between vertebrae.
Muscles attaching to the anterior
surface of the vertebrae, including the
psoas muscle and muscles of the
abdominal wall, assist with ﬂexion.

Muscles moving the neck and lower
vertebral column are summarized in
the table on p. 670.

Trapezius
(neck extension;
overlies small
intrinsic neck
muscles of neck
extension and
rotation)

Sternocleidomastoid
(neck flexion, rotation)
Splenius capitis
(neck extension)
Deltoid

Teres minor
Teres major

Spinous process T12

Latissimus dorsi

External abdominal
oblique

Techniques of Examination
Inspection. Inspect
the
patient’s posture when entering the
room, including the position of both
the neck and trunk.

Iliac crest
Gluteus maximus

FIGURE 16-52.

Muscles of the back.

Assess the patient for erect position of the head, neck, and back; for smooth,
coordinated neck movement; and for ease of gait.

668

Neck stiffness signals arthritis, muscle
strain, or other underlying pathology
that should be pursued; headache may
be present.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Drape or gown the patient to expose the entire back for complete inspection.
If possible, the patient should be upright in the natural standing position, with
feet together and arms at the sides. The head should be midline in the same plane
as the sacrum, and the shoulders and pelvis should be level.

Lateral deviation and rotation of the
head are seen in torticollis, from contraction of the sternocleidomastoid
muscle.

Viewing the patient from behind,
identify the following (Fig. 16-53):
■ Spinous processes, usually more

prominent at C7 and T1 and
more evident on forward ﬂexion
■ Paravertebral muscles on either

side of the midline

Paravertebral
muscles

Spinous process
of L4

Iliac crest

Posterior
superior
iliac spine

■ Iliac crests
■ Posterior

superior iliac spines,
usually marked by skin dimples.

A line drawn above the posterior iliac
crests crosses the spinous process of
L4.
Inspect the patient from the side and
from behind. Evaluate the spinal curvatures and the features in the display
on the next page.

Sciatic
nerve

Sacroiliac
joint

Ischial tuberosity
and site of
ischial bursa

FIGURE 16-53.

Important anatomy of the back.

Palpation. From a sitting or standing position, palpate the spinous processes of each vertebra with your thumb.

Vertebral tenderness raises concerns
for fracture, dislocation, underlying
infection, or arthritis.

In the neck, palpate the facet joints that lie between the cervical vertebrae 1 to
2 cm lateral to the spinous processes of C2 to C7. These joints lie deep to the
trapezius muscle and may not be palpable unless the neck muscles are relaxed.

Tenderness occurs in arthritis, especially at the facet joints between C5
and C6.

In the lower lumbar area, palpate carefully for vertebral “step-offs” to see if one
spinous process seems unusually prominent (or recessed) in relation to the one
above it. Identify any tenderness.

Step-offs occur in spondylolisthesis,
or forward slippage of one vertebra,
which may compress the spinal cord.

Palpate over the sacroiliac joint, often identiﬁed by the dimple overlying the posterior superior iliac spine.

Tenderness over the sacroiliac joint is
common in sacroiliitis and ankylosing
spondylitis.70

You may wish to percuss the spine for tenderness by thumping, but not too
roughly, with the ulnar surface of your ﬁst.

Pain with percussion occurs in vertebral osteoporotic fractures, infection,
and malignancy.

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

669

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Inspection of the Spine
View of Patient

From the side
Inspect the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar curves.

Increased thoracic kyphosis occurs
with aging.
Cervical
concavity
Thoracic
convexity

Lumbar
concavity

From behind
Inspect the upright spinal column (an
imaginary line should fall from C7
through the gluteal cleft).
Inspect the alignment of the shoulders,
the iliac crests, and the skin creases
below the buttocks (gluteal folds).

In scoliosis, lateral and rotatory curvature of the spine brings the head back
to midline. Scoliosis often becomes
evident during adolescence, before
symptoms appear.
Unequal shoulder heights occur in scoliosis, the Sprengel deformity of the
scapula from the attachment of an
extra bone or band between the
upper scapula and C7, “winging” of
the scapula from loss of long thoracic
nerve innervation to the serratus
anterior muscle, and contralateral
weakness of the trapezius.
Unequal heights of the iliac crests, or
pelvic tilt, occur in unequal leg
lengths, scoliosis, and hip abduction
or adduction. Check if unequal leg
lengths disappear when a block is
placed under the shorter limb. “Listing” of the trunk to one side is seen
with a herniated lumbar disc.

Inspect any skin markings, tags, or
masses.

Birthmarks, port-wine stains, hairy
patches, and lipomas often overlie
bony defects such as spina bifida.
Café-au-lait spots (discolored patches
of skin), skin tags, and fibrous tumors
are common in neurofibromatosis.

670

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Inspect and palpate the paravertebral muscles for tenderness and spasm. Muscles
in spasm feel ﬁrm and knotted and may be visible.

Spasm occurs in degenerative and
inflammatory muscle disorders, overuse, prolonged contraction from
abnormal posture, and anxiety.

With the patient’s hip ﬂexed and
the patient lying on the opposite
side, palpate the sciatic nerve, the
largest nerve in the body, consisting of nerve roots from L4, L5, S1,
S2, and S3 (Fig. 16-54). The sciatic
nerve lies midway between the
greater trochanter and the ischial
tuberosity as it runs through the
sciatic notch. It is difﬁcult to palpate in most patients.

Sciatic nerve tenderness is seen with a
herniated disc or nerve root impingement from a mass lesion.

Sciatic nerve
Greater trochanter

Ischial tuberosity

FIGURE 16-54.
nerve.

Palpate the sciatic

Palpate for tenderness in any other areas suggested by the patient’s symptoms.
Check for pain radiation into the buttocks, perineum, or legs.
Assess all low back pain for possible cauda equina compression, the most serious
cause of pain, due to risk of limb paralysis or bladder/bowel dysfunction.

Herniated intervertebral discs, most
common at L5–S1 or L4–L5, may
cause tenderness of the spinous processes, intervertebral joints, paravertebral muscles, sacrosciatic notch, and
sciatic nerve (Fig. 16-55).
See Table 16-3, Low Back Pain, p. 699.

L4

Spinous
process
of L4
Posterior
superior
iliac spine

Sacroiliac
joint

Paravertebral
muscles

Iliac crest

Sciatic
nerve

Ischial tuberosity
and site of
ischial bursa

FIGURE 16-55.

Palpate the bony landmarks and muscles of the back.

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

671

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Range of Motion and Maneuvers
Range of Motion: Neck. The neck is the most mobile portion of the spine,
remarkable for its seven fragile vertebrae supporting the 10- to 15-pound head.
Flexion and extension occur primarily between the skull and C1, the atlas; rotation at C1–C2, the axis; and lateral bending at C2–C7.

Limited range of motion is caused by
stiffness from arthritis, pain from
trauma, overuse, and muscle spasm
from torticollis.

Review the speciﬁc muscles responsible for each movement and their related
patient instructions in the inset below.

Assess any complaints or findings of
neck, shoulder, or arm pain, numbness, or weakness for possible cervical
cord or nerve root compression. See
Table 16-2, Pains in the Neck, p. 698.

Neck Range of Motion
Neck
Movement

Primary Muscles
Affecting Movement

Flexion

Sternocleidomastoid, scalene, prevertebral muscles
Splenius capitis and cervicis,
small intrinsic neck muscles
Sternocleidomastoid, small
intrinsic neck muscles
Scalenes and small intrinsic
neck muscles

Extension

Rotation
Lateral Bending

Patient Instructions
“Bring your chin to your
chest.”
“Look up at the ceiling.”

“Look over one shoulder,
and then the other.”
“Bring your ear to your
shoulder.”

Tenderness, loss of sensation, or weakness warrant careful neurologic testing of
the neck and upper extremities.

Tenderness at C1–C2 in RA is suspicious
for possible subluxation and high cervical cord compression and warrants
prompt additional assessment.

In the inset below, note the muscles responsible for each movement and instructions to the patient.
Range of Motion: Spinal Column.

Spinal Column Range of Motion
Back
Movement

Primary Muscles
Affecting Movement

Patient
Instructions

Flexion

Psoas major, psoas minor,
quadratus lumborum;
abdominal muscles
attaching to the anterior
vertebrae, such as the
internal and external
obliques and rectus
abdominis

“Bend forward and try to
touch your toes.”
Note the smoothness and
symmetry of movement, the range of
motion, and the curve
in the lumbar area. As
ﬂexion proceeds, the
lumbar concavity
should ﬂatten out.

Deformity of the thorax on forward
bending, especially when the height
of the scapulae is unequal, suggests
scoliosis.
Persistence of lumbar lordosis suggests muscle spasm or ankylosing
spondylitis.70

(continued )

672

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS

Spinal Column Range of Motion (continued )
Back
Movement

Primary Muscles
Affecting Movement

Patient
Instructions

Extension

Deep intrinsic muscles of
the back, such as the
erector spinae and transversospinalis groups

“Bend back as far as possible.”

Decreased spinal mobility is common
in OA and ankylosing spondylitis.

Support the patient by
placing your hand on
the posterior superior
iliac spine, with your
ﬁngers pointing
toward the midline.

Rotation

Abdominal muscles, intrinsic muscles of the back

“Rotate from side to side.”
Stabilize the patient’s
pelvis by placing one
hand on the patient’s
hip and the other on
the opposite shoulder.
Then rotate the trunk by
pulling the shoulder
anteriorly and then the
hip posteriorly. Repeat
these maneuvers for
the opposite side.

Lateral Bending

Abdominal muscles, intrinsic muscles of the back

“Bend to the side from the
waist.”
Stabilize the patient’s
pelvis by placing your
hand on the patient’s
hip. Repeat for the
opposite side.

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

673

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

If these maneuvers provoke pain or tenderness, particularly with radiation into
the leg, proceed to careful neurologic testing of the lower extremities.

Consider lumbosacral cord or nerve
root compression; arthritis, mass
lesion, or infection in the hip, rectum,
or pelvis may also cause symptoms.
See Table 16-3, Low Back Pain, p. 699.
See Chapter 17, The Nervous System, for
the Straight Leg Raise Test, pp. 765–766.
Although helpful, this test is not diagnostic of disc herniation.71–73

Non-organic physical ﬁndings (Waddell signs) include superﬁcial or nonanatomic tenderness, pain on axial loading or simulated rotation, nonreproducibility of pain when the patient is distracted, regional weakness or sensory change,
and overreaction to stimuli that should not cause back pain.24,31

The Hip
Overview. The hip joint is deeply embedded in the pelvis and is notable for
its strength, stability, and wide range of motion. The stability of the hip joint,
essential for weight bearing, arises from the deep ﬁt of the head of the femur into
the acetabulum, its strong ﬁbrous articular capsule, and the powerful muscles
crossing the joint and inserting below the femoral head, providing leverage for
movement of the femur.
Bony Structures and Joints. The hip joint lies below the middle third
of the inguinal ligament but in a deeper plane. It is a ball-and-socket joint; note
how the rounded head of the femur articulates with the cup-like cavity of the
acetabulum. Because of its overlying muscles and depth, the hip joint is not
readily palpable. Review the bones of the pelvis—the acetabulum, the ilium, and
the ischium—and the connection inferiorly at the symphysis pubis and posteriorly
with the sacroiliac bone.

On the anterior surface of the hip, locate the following
bony structures (Fig. 16-56):
■ The iliac crest at the level of L4

Wing of ilium

Iliac crest

Iliac tubercle
Anterior superior
iliac spine

■ The iliac tubercle
■ The anterior superior iliac spine

Acetabulum

Greater trochanter
(femur)

Psoas bursa

■ The greater trochanter

Trochanteric
bursa

■ The pubic tubercle

Ischial bursa

Ischium

Pubic tubercle

FIGURE 16-56.

674

Anterior view of the pelvis.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
On the posterior surface of the hip, locate the following (Fig. 16-57):

Iliac crest

Spinous process

Iliac tubercle

■ The posterior superior iliac spine

Sacroiliac
joint

■ The greater trochanter

Sacrum

Posterior
superior
iliac spine
S2

Greater trochanter
(femur)

■ The ischial tuberosity

Trochanteric
bursa

■ The sacroiliac joint

Note that you can locate S2 by envisioning an
imaginary line across the posterior superior iliac
spines.
Ischial bursa

Ischial tuberosity

F I G U R E 1 6 - 5 7 . Posterior view of the pelvis.

Muscle Groups. Four powerful muscle groups move the hip. Picture these
groups as you examine patients, and remember that to move the femur or any
bone in a given direction, the muscle must cross the joint line.

The ﬂexor group lies anteriorly and
ﬂexes the thigh (Fig. 16-58). The primary hip ﬂexor is the iliopsoas, extending from above the iliac crest to the
lesser trochanter. The extensor group
lies posteriorly and extends the thigh
(Fig. 16-59). The gluteus maximus is
the primary extensor of the hip. It
forms a band crossing from its origin
along the medial pelvis to its insertion
below the trochanter.

Iliopsoas
Gluteus
maximus

Flexor Group

FIGURE 16-58.

Extensor Group

Flexor group.

F I G U R E 1 6 - 5 9 . Extensor group.

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

675

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
The adductor group is medial and swings
the thigh toward the body (Fig. 16-60).
The muscles in this group arise from the
rami of the pubis and ischium and insert
on the posteromedial aspect of the femur.
The abductor group is lateral, extending
from the iliac crest to the greater trochanter,
and moves the thigh away from the body
(Fig. 16-61). This group includes the gluteus medius and minimus. These muscles
help stabilize the pelvis during the stance
phase of gait.

Adductor Group

F I G U R E 1 6 - 6 0 . Adductor group.

Abductor Group

F I G U R E 1 6 - 6 1 . Abductor group.

Additional Structures. A strong, dense articular capsule, extending
from the acetabulum to the femoral neck, encases and strengthens the hip
joint. The capsule is reinforced by three overlying ligaments and lined with
synovial membrane. There are three principal bursae at the hip. Anterior to the
joint is the psoas (also termed iliopectineal or iliopsoas) bursa, overlying the
articular capsule and the psoas muscle. Find the bony prominence lateral to the hip
joint—the greater trochanter of the femur. The large multilocular trochanteric bursa
lies on its posterior surface. The ischial (or ischiogluteal) bursa, not always present,
lies under the ischial tuberosity, and accommodates the weight of the sitting position.
Note its proximity to the sciatic nerve, as shown on p. 679.
Techniques of Examination
Inspection. Inspection of the hip begins with careful observation of the
patient’s gait when entering the room. Observe the two phases of gait:
■ Stance—when the foot is on the ground and bears weight (60% of the walk-

ing cycle) (Fig. 16-62)

Heelstrike

Foot flat

Midstance

Most hip problems appear during the
weight-bearing stance phase.

Push-off

THE STANCE PHASE OF GAIT

FIGURE 16-62.

Stance phase of gait.

■ Swing—when the foot moves forward and does not bear weight (40% of the

cycle)
676

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Inspect the gait for the width of the base,
the shift of the pelvis, and ﬂexion of the
knee (Fig. 16-63). The width of the base
should be 2 to 4 inches from heel to heel.
Normal gait has a smooth, continuous
rhythm, achieved in part by contraction of
the abductors of the weight-bearing limb.
Abductor contraction stabilizes the pelvis
and helps maintain balance, raising the
opposite hip. The knee should be ﬂexed
throughout the stance phase, except when
the heel strikes the ground to counteract
motion at the ankle.

A wide base suggests cerebellar disease or foot problems. Pain during
weight bearing or examiner strike on
the heel occurs in femoral neck stress
fractures.74,75
Hip dislocation, arthritis, unequal leg
lengths, or abductor weakness can
cause the pelvis to drop on the opposite side, producing a waddling gait.

2–4 inches

Lack of knee flexion, which makes the
leg functionally longer, interrupts the
smooth pattern of gait, causing circumduction (swinging the leg out to
the side).

F I G U R E 1 6 - 6 3 . Inspect base
of gait width.

Inspect the lumbar portion of the spine for the degree of lordosis and, with the
patient supine, assess the length of the legs for symmetry. (To measure leg length,
see Special Techniques, p. 694.)

Loss of lordosis occurs with paravertebral spasm; excess lordosis suggests a
flexion deformity of the hip.
Disparities in leg length occur in
abduction or adduction deformities
and scoliosis. Leg shortening and
external rotation are common in
hip fracture.

Inspect the anterior and posterior surfaces of the hip for any areas of muscle
atrophy or bruising. The joint is too deeply situated to detect swelling.
Palpation
Bony Landmarks. Palpate the surface landmarks of the hip, identified on
p. 674. On the anterior aspect of the hips, these can be located as follows.

Palpation of Bony Landmarks of the Hip
Anterior Landmarks

Identify the iliac crest at the upper margin of the pelvis at the level of L4.
● Follow the downward anterior curve and locate the iliac tubercle, marking the
widest point of the crest, and continue tracking downward to the anterior–
superior iliac spine.
● Place your thumbs on the anterior–superior spines and move your ﬁngers
downward and laterally from the iliac tubercles to the greater trochanter of
the femur.
● Then move your thumbs medially and obliquely to the pubic tubercle, which
lies at the same level as the greater trochanter.
(continued )
●

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

677

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS

Palpation of Bony Landmarks of the Hip (continued )
Posterior Landmarks

Palpate the posterior–superior iliac spine directly underneath the visible dimples just above the buttocks.
● Placing your left thumb and index ﬁnger over the posterior superior iliac
spine, next locate the greater trochanter laterally with your ﬁngers at the level
of the gluteal fold, and place your thumb medially on the ischial tuberosity. The
sacroiliac joint is not always palpable but may be tender. Note that an imaginary line along the posterior–superior iliac spines crosses the joint at S2.
●

With the patient supine, ask the patient to place the
heel of the leg being examined on the opposite knee. Then palpate along the inguinal ligament, which extends from the
anterior–superior iliac spine to the pubic
tubercle (Fig. 16-64).

Sacroiliac joint tenderness suggests
sacroiliitis.

Bulges along the ligament suggest
an inguinal hernia or, at times, an
aneurysm.

Inguinal Structures.

Inguinal
ligament

Enlarged lymph nodes point to infection in the pelvis or lower extremity.

Femoral nerve
Femoral artery
Femoral vein

Causes of groin tenderness are synovitis of the hip joint, arthritis; bursitis; or
possible psoas abscess.

F I G U R E 1 6 - 6 4 . The inguinal
ligament and N-A-V-E-L.

Focal tenderness over the trochanter
confirms trochanteric bursitis. Tenderness over the posterolateral surface of
the greater trochanter occurs in localized tendinitis, muscle spasm from
referred hip pain, and iliotibial band
tendinitis.

The femoral nerve, artery, and vein bisect the overlying inguinal ligament; lymph
nodes lie medially. The mnemonic NAVEL may help you remember the lateralto-medial sequence of Nerve–Artery–Vein–Empty space–Lymph node.

Anterior or inguinal pain, typically deep within the hip joint and radiating to the
knee, points to intra-articular pathology; pain radiating to the buttocks or posterior trochanteric region points to extra-articular causes.75

Intra-articular causes include OA,
osteonecrosis of the femoral head,
acetabular labral tears, and femoral
neck stress fracture. Extra-articular
causes include trochanteric bursitis,
muscle strain, sacroiliac disorders,
and lumbar radiculopathy.74–76

Bursae. If the hip is painful, palpate the (psoas) bursa, below the inguinal
ligament but on a deeper plane.

678

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
With the patient resting on one side and the hip ﬂexed and internally rotated,
palpate the trochanteric bursa lying over the greater trochanter (Fig. 16-65). Normally, the ischiogluteal bursa, over the ischial tuberosity, is not palpable unless
inﬂamed (Fig. 16-66).
Trochanteric bursa

Look for tenderness in ischiogluteal
bursitis or “weaver’s bottom”; because
of the adjacent sciatic nerve, this may
mimic sciatica.

Ischiogluteal bursa

FIGURE 16-65.
trochanteric bursa.

Palpate the

FIGURE 16-66.
ischiogluteal bursa.

Palpate the

Range of Motion and Maneuvers

Assess hip range of motion and the specific muscles responsible for each movement. Review the instructions to the patient. Normal values for hip flexion, abduction, and adduction are 120°, 45°, and 20° respectively.
Range of Motion.

Hip Range of Motion
Hip Movement

Primary Muscles
Affecting Movement

Flexion

Iliopsoas

Extension (actually
hyperextension)

Abduction
Adduction

External Rotation

Internal Rotation

Patient Instructions

“Bend your knee to your chest
and pull it against your
abdomen.”
Gluteus maximus
“Lie face down, then bend your
knee and lift it up.”
OR “Lying ﬂat, move your
lower leg away from the
midline and down over the
side of the table.”
Gluteus medius and
“Lying ﬂat, move your lower
minimus
leg away from the midline.”
Adductor brevis, adductor “Lying ﬂat, bend your knee and
longus, adductor magmove your lower leg toward
nus, pectineus, gracilis
the midline.”
Internal and external
“Lying ﬂat, bend your knee and
obturators, quadratus
turn your lower leg and foot
femoris, superior and
across the midline.”
inferior gemelli
Iliopsoas
“Lying ﬂat, bend your knee and
turn your lower leg and foot
away from the midline.”

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

679

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Maneuvers. Often, the examiner must assist the patient with movements
of the hip, so further detail is provided below for flexion, abduction, adduction,
and external and internal rotation. Meta-analyses suggest that no single test discriminates specific hip pathology.75,77,78
■ Flexion. With the patient supine, place your hand under the patient’s lumbar

spine. Ask the patient to bend each knee in turn up to the chest and pull it
ﬁrmly against the abdomen (Fig. 16-67). Note that the hip can ﬂex further
when the knee is ﬂexed because the hamstrings are relaxed. When the back
touches your hand, indicating normal ﬂattening of the lumbar lordosis, further ﬂexion must arise from the hip joint itself.

In flexion deformity of the hip, as the
opposite hip is flexed (with the thigh
against the chest), the affected hip
does not allow full hip extension and
the affected thigh appears flexed
(Fig. 16-68).

FIGURE 16-68.
deformity of the hip.

FIGURE 16-67.

Flexion

Hip ﬂexion and ﬂattening of lumbar lordosis.

As the thigh is held against the abdomen, inspect the degree of ﬂexion at the
hip and knee. Normally, the anterior portion of the thigh can almost touch
the chest wall. Note whether the opposite thigh remains fully extended, resting on the table.

Flexion deformity may be masked by
an increase, rather than flattening, in
lumbar lordosis and an anterior pelvic
tilt.

■ Extension. With the patient lying face down, extend the thigh toward you in

a posterior direction. Alternatively, carefully position the supine patient near
the edge of the table and extend the leg posteriorly.
■ Abduction. Stabilize the pelvis by pressing down on the opposite anterior–

superior iliac spine with one hand. With the other hand, grasp the ankle and
abduct the extended leg until you feel the iliac spine move (Fig. 16-69). This
movement marks the limit of hip abduction.

680

Restricted abduction and internal and
external rotation are common in hip
OA. The LR for resisted external rotation due to pain is as high as 32.6.12,77

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS

FIGURE 16-69.

Abduct the leg.

■ Adduction. With the patient supine, stabilize the pelvis, hold one ankle, and

move the leg medially across the body and over the opposite extremity
(Fig. 16-70).

FIGURE 16-70.

Adduct the leg.

■ External and internal rotation. Flex the

Pain with maximal flexion and adduction and internal rotation or with
abduction and external rotation with
full extension signals acetabular labral
tear.74,75

leg to 90° at hip and knee, stabilize the
thigh with one hand, grasp the ankle
with the other, and swing the lower
leg—medially for external rotation at
the hip, and laterally for internal rotation (Fig. 16-71). Although confusing
at ﬁrst, it is the motion of the head of
the femur in the acetabulum that identiﬁes these movements.
F I G U R E 1 6 - 7 1 . Test internal
and external rotation of the hip.

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

681

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS

The Knee
Overview. The knee joint is the largest joint in the body. It is a hinge joint
involving three bones: the femur, the tibia, and the patella (or knee cap), with
three articular surfaces, two between the femur and the tibia and one between
the femur and the patella. Note how the two rounded condyles of the femur rest
on the relatively ﬂat tibial plateau. There is no inherent stability in the knee
joint itself, making it dependent on four ligaments to hold its articulating
femur and tibia in place. This feature, in addition to the lever action of the
femur on the tibia and the lack of padding from overlying fat or muscle, makes
the knee highly vulnerable to injury.
Bony Structures. Learn the bony landmarks in and around the knee.
These will guide your examination of this complicated joint (Fig. 16-72).
■ On the medial surface, identify

the adductor tubercle, the medial
epicondyle of the femur, and the
medial condyle of the tibia.

Femur
Adductor tubercle

■ On the anterior surface, identify

the patella, which rests on the anterior articulating surface of the
femur midway between the epicondyles, embedded in the tendon of the quadriceps muscle.
This tendon continues below the
knee joint as the patellar tendon,
which inserts distally on the tibial
tuberosity.

Lateral epicondyle
Medial epicondyle
Posterior cruciate
ligament

Lateral collateral
ligament

Medial meniscus

Anterior cruciate
ligament

Medial condyle
of tibia

Lateral meniscus

Medial collateral
ligament

Lateral condyle
of tibia

■ On the lateral surface, ﬁnd the

lateral epicondyle of the femur, the
lateral condyle of the tibia, and
the head of the ﬁbula.

Tibia

Head of fibula

Tibial tuberosity

Fibula

F I G U R E 1 6 - 7 2 . Anterior view of the knee.

Joints. Two condylar tibiofemoral joints are formed by the convex curves of
the medial and lateral condyles of the femur as they articulate with the concave
condyles of the tibia. The third articular surface is the patellofemoral joint. The
patella slides on the groove of the anterior aspect of the distal femur, called the
trochlear groove, during ﬂexion and extension of the knee.

682

Problems with patellar tracking, for
example, in patients with shallower
grooves, especially women, can lead
to arthritis, anterior knee pain, and
patellar dislocation.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Muscle Groups. Powerful muscles move and support the knee. The
quadriceps femoris extends the knee, covering the anterior, medial, and lateral
aspects of the thigh (Figs. 16-73 and 16-74). The hamstring muscles lie on the
posterior aspect of the thigh and ﬂex the knee.

In women, quadriceps contraction
often exerts a more lateral pull (Q
angle) that alters patellar tracking,
contributing to anterior knee pain.

Hamstring muscles
Semimembranosus
Quadriceps femoris

Gracilis
Sartorius

Rectus femoris

Semitendinosus

Vastus lateralis
Vastus medialis

F I G U R E 1 6 - 7 3 . Quadriceps
femoris—anterior view.

F I G U R E 1 6 - 7 4 . Hamstring
muscles—medial view.

Additional Structures
Menisci and Ligaments. The menisci and two important pairs of ligaments, the collaterals and the cruciates, are crucial to stability of the knee.
Learn the location of these structures from the illustrations on p. 682 and below
(Fig. 16-75).
■ The medial and lateral menisci cush-

ion the action of the femur on the
tibia. These crescent-shaped ﬁbrocartilaginous discs add a cup-like
surface to the otherwise ﬂat tibial
plateau.
■ The medial collateral ligament (MCL),

not easily palpable, is a broad, ﬂat
ligament connecting the medial femoral epicondyle to the medial condyle of the tibia. The medial portion
of the MCL also attaches to the medial meniscus.

Vastus
medialis

Femur

Suprapatellar
pouch

Semimembranosus
bursa (synovial
cavity distended)

Prepatella
bursa
Patella

Medial
collateral
ligament
Medial
meniscus

Patellar
tendon
Tibial
tuberosity
Anserine
bursa

Fibula
Tibia

F I G U R E 1 6 - 7 5 . Left knee—medial view.

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

683

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

■ The lateral collateral ligament (LCL) connects the lateral femoral epicondyle

and the head of the ﬁbula. The MCL and LCL provide medial and lateral
stability to the knee joint.
■ The ACL crosses obliquely from the anterior medial tibia to the lateral femo-

ral condyle, preventing the tibia from sliding forward on the femur.
■ The posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) crosses from the posterior tibia and lat-

eral meniscus to the medial femoral condyle, preventing the tibia from slipping backward on the femur. Although the ACL and PCL lie within the knee
joint so are not palpable, they are nonetheless crucial to the anteroposterior
stability of the knee.
Negative Infrapatellar Space and Suprapatellar Pouch. Inspect the
concavities that are usually evident adjacent and superior to each side of the patella,
known as the “negative infrapatellar space” (Fig. 16-76). Occupying these areas is
the synovial cavity of the knee, one of the largest joint cavities in the body. This cavity includes an extension 6 cm above the upper border of the patella, lying upward
and deep to the quadriceps muscle, called the suprapatellar pouch. The joint cavity
covers the anterior, medial, and lateral surfaces of the knee, as well as the condyles
of the femur and tibia posteriorly. Although the synovium is not normally palpable,
these areas may become swollen and tender when the joint is inﬂamed or injured.
Bursae. Several bursae lie near the knee. The prepatellar bursa lies between
the patella and the overlying skin. The anserine bursa lies 1 to 2 cm below the knee
joint on the medial surface, proximal and medial to the attachments of the medial
hamstring muscles on the proximal tibia. It cannot be palpated due to these overlying tendons. Now identify the large semimembranosus bursa that communicates
with the joint cavity, also on the posterior and medial surfaces of the knee.

F I G U R E 1 6 - 7 6 . Normal negative
infrapatellar spaces.

Techniques of Examination. Learn to examine “the seven structures
of the knee”: the medial and lateral menisci, the LCL and MCL, the ACL and
PCL, and the patellar tendon. The ACL and PCL are not palpable but are tested
by speciﬁc maneuvers. Palpation and maneuvers of these structures are especially
helpful in primary care diagnosis.
Inspection. Inspect the gait for a smooth rhythmic ﬂow as the patient enters
the room. The knee should be extended at heel strike and ﬂexed at all other phases
of swing and stance.

Stumbling or “giving way” of the knee
during heel strike suggests quadriceps
weakness or abnormal patellar tracking.

Check the alignment and contours of the knees. Observe any atrophy of the
quadriceps muscles.

Bow-legs (genu varum) and knockknees (genu valgum) are common.
Quadriceps atrophy signals hip girdle
weakness in older adults.

Inspect for any loss of the normal hollows around the patella, a sign of swelling
in the knee joint and suprapatellar pouch; note any other swelling in or around
the knee.

Swelling over the patella occurs in
prepatellar bursitis (housemaid’s
knee). Swelling over the tibial tubercle suggests infrapatellar or, if more
medial, anserine bursitis.

684

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Palpation. Ask the patient to sit on the edge of the examining table with
the knees in ﬂexion. In this position, bony landmarks are more visible, and the
muscles, tendons, and ligaments are more relaxed, making them easier to palpate.
Pay special attention to any areas of tenderness. Pain is a common complaint in
knee problems, and localizing the structure causing pain is important for accurate
evaluation.
The Tibiofemoral Joint. Palpate the tibiofemoral joint. Facing the knee, place
your thumbs in the soft tissue depressions on either side of the patellar tendon.
Identify the groove of the tibiofemoral joint. Note that the inferior pole of the
patella lies at the tibiofemoral joint line. As you press your thumbs downward,
you can feel the edge of the tibial plateau. Follow it medially, then laterally, until
you are stopped by the converging femur and tibia. By moving your thumbs upward toward the midline to the top of the patella, you can follow the articulating
surface of the femur and identify the margins of the joint.

Note any irregular bony ridges along the joint margins.

Bony enlargement at the joint margins,
genu varum deformity, and stiffness
lasting ≤30 minutes are typical findings
in OA (LRs 11.8, 3.4, and 3.0, respectively).57 Crepitus is also common.

■ Medial and lateral menisci. Palpate the medial meniscus. Press on the medial

soft tissue depression along the upper edge of the tibial plateau with the tibia
slightly internally rotated. Place the knee in slight ﬂexion and palpate the
lateral meniscus along the lateral joint line.

A medial meniscus tear with joint line
point tenderness is common after
trauma and requires prompt further
evaluation.79

■ Medial and lateral joint compartments: MCL

and LCL. Palpate the medial and lateral joint
compartments of the tibiofemoral joint
with the knee ﬂexed on the examining
table to approximately 90°. Pay special attention to any areas of pain or tenderness.

Medial femoral
condyle

■ Medial compartment (Fig. 16-77). Medi-

ally, move your thumbs upward to palpate the medial femoral condyle. The
adductor tubercle is posterior to the medial femoral condyle. Move your
thumbs downward to palpate the medial tibial plateau.
Also medially, palpate along the joint
line and identify the MCL, which connects the medial epicondyle of the
femur to the medial condyle and superior medial surface of the tibia. Palpate
along this broad, ﬂat ligament from its
origin to insertion.

Adductor
tubercle
Medial femoral
epicondyle

Patellar tendon

Medial
collateral
ligament
Medial tibial
plateau

Anserine
bursa

Tibial tuberosity

F I G U R E 1 6 - 7 7 . Medial compartment of the knee.

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

685

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
■ Lateral compartment. Lateral to the patellar tendon, move your thumbs

upward to palpate the lateral femoral condyle and downward to palpate the
lateral tibial plateau. When the knee is ﬂexed, the femoral epicondyles are
lateral to the femoral condyles.

MCL tenderness after injury is suspicious for an MCL tear; LCL injuries are
less frequent.

■ Also on the lateral surface, ask the patient to cross one leg so that the ankle

rests on the opposite knee and ﬁnd the LCL, a ﬁrm cord that runs from
the lateral femoral epicondyle to the head of the ﬁbula.
■ Patellofemoral compartment: patellar tendon. Palpate the patellofemoral com-

partment. Locate the patella and trace the patellar tendon distally until you
palpate the tibial tuberosity. Ask the patient to extend the knee to make sure
the patellar tendon is intact.

Tenderness over the tendon or inability to extend the knee suggests a partial or complete tear of the patellar
tendon.

With the patient supine and the knee extended, compress the patella against
the underlying femur, and gently move it medially and laterally, assessing for
crepitus and pain. Ask the patient to tighten the quadriceps as the patella
moves distally in the trochlear groove. Check for a smooth sliding motion
(the patellofemoral grinding test).

Pain and crepitus arise from the
roughened undersurface of the
patella as it articulates with the femur.
Similar pain may occur when using
the stairs, or getting up from a chair.
Pain with compression and patellar
movement during quadriceps contraction occurs in chondromalacia.
Two of three findings are most diagnostic of the patellofemoral pain
syndrome: pain with quadriceps contraction; pain with squatting; and
pain with palpation of the posteromedial/or lateral patellar border.80,81
Swelling around the patella points to
synovial thickening or effusion of the
knee joint (Fig. 16-79).

The Suprapatellar Pouch, Prepatellar
Bursa, and Anserine Bursa. Palpate for

any thickening or swelling in the suprapatellar pouch and along the margins of the
patella (Fig. 16-78). Start 10 cm above
the superior border of the patella, well
above the pouch, and feel the soft tissues
between your thumb and fingers. Move
your hand distally in progressive steps,
trying to identify the pouch. Continue
your palpation along the sides of the patella. Note any tenderness or increased
warmth.

FIGURE 16-79.
knee joint.
FIGURE 16-78.
suprapatellar pouch.

686

Palpate the

Effusion of the

Thickening, bogginess, or warmth
occurs with synovitis and nontender
effusions from OA.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Check three other bursae for bogginess or swelling. Palpate the prepatellar bursa.
Palpate over the anserine bursa on the posteromedial side of the knee between
the MCL and the tendons inserting on the medial tibial and plateau. On the
posterior surface, with the leg extended, check the medial aspect of the popliteal
fossa.

Prepatellar bursitis is triggered by
excessive kneeling; anserine bursitis
from running, valgus knee deformity,
or OA; and a popliteal or “Baker” cyst
from distention of the gastrocnemius
semimembranosus bursa from underlying arthritis or trauma.

Palpation Tests for Knee Joint Effusions. Learn to apply three tests for detecting fluid in the knee joint: the bulge sign, the balloon sign, and balloting
the patella.
■ The bulge sign (for minor effusions). With the knee extended, place the left hand

above the knee and apply pressure on the suprapatellar pouch, displacing or “milking” ﬂuid downward (Fig. 16-80). Stroke downward on the medial aspect of the
knee and apply pressure to force ﬂuid into the lateral area (Fig. 16-81). Tap the
knee just behind the lateral margin of the patella with the right hand (Fig. 16-82).

FIGURE 16-80.
downward.

Milk

FIGURE 16-81.
medial pressure.

Apply

FIGURE 16-82.
for ﬂuid wave.

■ The balloon sign (for major

A fluid wave or bulge on the medial
side between the patella and the
femur is a positive test for effusion.

Tap and watch

A palpable fluid wave is a positive test
or “balloon sign.” A palpable returning
fluid wave into the suprapatellar pouch
further confirms a major effusion,
present in knee fractures (LR 2.5).57

effusions). Place the thumb
and index ﬁnger of your
right hand on each side of
the patella; with the left
hand, compress the suprapatellar pouch against the
femur (Fig. 16-83). Palpate
for ﬂuid ejected or “ballooning” into the spaces next to
the patella under your right
thumb and index ﬁnger.
FIGURE 16-83.

Test for the balloon sign.

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

687

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

■ Balloting the patella (for major effusions).

A palpable fluid wave returning into
the pouch is also a positive test for a
major effusion.

To assess large effusions, you can also
compress the suprapatellar pouch and
“ballotte” or push the patella sharply
against the femur (Fig. 16-84). Watch for
ﬂuid returning to the suprapatellar
pouch.

A palpable patellar click with compression may also occur, but yields
more false positives.

FIGURE 16-84.
patella.

Ballotte the

Gastrocnemius and Soleus Muscles, Achilles Tendon. Palpate the gastrocnemius and soleus muscles on the posterior lower leg. Their common tendon,
the Achilles, is palpable from about the lower third of the calf to its insertion on
the calcaneus.

A defect in the muscles, tenderness,
and swelling signal a ruptured Achilles
tendon; tenderness and thickening of
the tendon, at times with a protuberant posterolateral bony process of the
calcaneus, suggests Achilles tendinitis.

To test the integrity of the Achilles tendon, place the patient prone with the knee
and ankle ﬂexed at 90°, or alternatively, ask the patient to kneel on a chair.
Squeeze the calf and watch for plantar ﬂexion at the ankle.

Absent plantar flexion is a positive test
for Achilles tendon rupture. Sudden
severe pain “like a gunshot,” an ecchymosis from the calf into the heel, and
a flat-footed gait with absent “toe-off”
may also be present.

Range of Motion and Maneuvers

Now assess knee range of motion, referring to the box
below for specific muscles responsible for each movement and for instructions
to the patient.
Range of Motion.

Knee Range of Motion
Knee
Movement

Primary Muscles
Affecting Movement

Flexion

Hamstring group: biceps
femoris, semitendinosus,
and semimembranosus
Quadriceps: rectus femoris,
vastus medialis, lateralis,
and intermedius
Sartorius, gracilis, semitendinosus, semimembranosus
Biceps femoris

Extension

Internal
Rotation
External
Rotation

688

Patient Instructions
“Bend or ﬂex your knee.” OR
“Squat down to the ﬂoor.”
“Straighten your leg.” OR “After
you squat down to the ﬂoor,
stand up.”
“While sitting, swing your lower
leg toward the midline.”
“While sitting, swing your lower
leg away from the midline.”

Crepitus with flexion and extension
signals patellofemoral OA, a probable
precursor of knee OA.82

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Maneuvers. You will often need to test ligamentous stability and integrity
of the medial and lateral menisci, the MCL and LCL, the patellar tendon, and
the ACL and PCL (not palpable), particularly when there is a history of trauma or knee pain.57,80,83–85 Always examine both knees and compare ﬁndings.

ACL tears are notably more frequent
in women, attributed to ligamentous
laxity related to estrogen cycling and
to differences in anatomy and neuromuscular control. ACL injury prevention programs are now common.

Maneuvers for Examining the Knee
Structure

Maneuver

Medial Meniscus and Lateral
Meniscus

McMurray Test. With the patient supine,
grasp the heel and ﬂex the knee. Cup
your other hand over the knee joint
with ﬁngers and thumb along the
medial joint line. From the heel, externally rotate the lower leg, then push
on the lateral side to apply a valgus
stress on the medial side of the joint.
At the same time, slowly extend the
lower leg in external rotation.
The same maneuver with internal rotation of the foot stresses the lateral
meniscus.
If a click is felt or heard at the joint line
during ﬂexion and extension of the
knee, or if tenderness is noted along
the joint line, further assess the
meniscus for a posterior tear.

A palpable click or pop along the
medial or lateral joint line is a positive
test for a tear of the posterior portion
of the medial meniscus (positive LR of
4.5).57 The tear may displace meniscal
tissue, causing “locking” on full knee
extension.

Medial Collateral Ligament (MCL)

Abduction (or Valgus) Stress Test. With
the patient supine and the knee slightly
ﬂexed, move the thigh about 30° laterally to the side of the table. Place one
hand against the lateral knee to stabilize the femur and the other hand
around the medial ankle. Push medially
against the knee and pull laterally at
the ankle to open the knee joint on the
medial side (valgus stress).

Pain or a gap in the medial joint line is
a positive test for an MCL injury (sensitivity 79–89%; specificity 49–99%).57

Lateral Collateral Ligament (LCL)

Adduction (or Varus) Stress Test. With
the thigh and knee in the same position, change your position so that
you can place one hand against the
medial surface of the knee and the
other around the lateral ankle. Push
laterally against the knee and pull
medially at the ankle to open the
knee joint on the lateral side (varus
stress).

Pain or a gap in the lateral joint line
points is a positive test for LCL injury
(less common than MCL injuries).

(continued )

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

689

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Maneuvers for Examining the Knee (continued )
Structure

Maneuver

Anterior Cruciate Ligament (ACL)

Anterior Drawer Sign. With the patient
supine, hips ﬂexed and knees ﬂexed
to 90° and feet ﬂat on the table, cup
your hands around the knee with the
thumbs on the medial and lateral
joint line and the ﬁngers on the
medial and lateral insertions of the
hamstrings. Draw the tibia forward
and observe if it slides forward (like a
drawer) from under the femur. Compare the degree of forward movement with that of the opposite knee.

A few degrees of forward movement
are normal if equally present on the
opposite side.

Lachman Test. Place the knee in 15° of
ﬂexion and external rotation. Grasp
the distal femur on the lateral side
with one hand and the proximal tibia
on the medial side with the other.
With the thumb of the tibial hand on
the joint line, simultaneously pull
the tibia forward and the femur back.
Estimate the degree of forward
excursion.

Significant forward excursion is a positive test for an ACL tear (positive LR
of 17.0).57

Posterior Drawer Sign. Position the
patient and place your hands in the
positions described for the anterior
drawer test. Push the tibia posteriorly and observe the degree of backward movement in the femur.

If the proximal tibia falls back, this is a
positive test for PCL injury (positive LR
of 97.8).57

Posterior Cruciate Ligament (PCL)

A forward jerk showing the contours
of the upper tibia is a positive test, or
anterior drawer sign, with a positive LR
of 11.5 for an ACL tear.57
ACL injuries result from knee hyperextension, direct blows to the knee, and
twisting or landing on an extended
hip or knee.

Isolated PCL tears are less common,
usually resulting from a direct blow to
the proximal tibia.

The Ankle and Foot
Overview. The total weight of the body is transmitted through the ankle to
the foot. The ankle and foot must balance the body and absorb the impact of the
heel strike and gait. Despite thick padding along the toes, sole, and heel and
stabilizing ligaments at the ankles, the ankle and foot are frequent sites of sprain
and bony injury.
Bony Structures and Joints. The ankle is a hinge joint formed by the
tibia, the ﬁbula, and the talus. The tibia and ﬁbula act as a mortise, stabilizing the
joint while bracing the talus like an inverted cup.

690

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
The principal joints of the ankle are the
tibiotalar joint, between the tibia and the
talus, and the subtalar (talocalcaneal) joint
(Fig. 16-85).
Note the principal landmarks of the
ankle: the medial malleolus, the bony
prominence at the distal end of the tibia,
and the lateral malleolus, at the distal end
of the ﬁbula. Lodged under the talus and
jutting posteriorly is the calcaneus, or heel
bone.

Tibia

Achilles
tendon

Medial malleolus
Tibiotalar joint
Deltoid ligament

Talus
Subtalar
joint

Longitudinal
arch

Calcaneus
Hindfoot

Midfoot

Forefoot

F I G U R E 1 6 - 8 5 . Ankle, medial view.

An imaginary line, the longitudinal arch,
spans the foot, extending from the calcaneus of the hind foot along the tarsal
bones of the midfoot (see cuneiform,
navicular, and cuboid bones in Fig. 16-86)
to the forefoot metatarsals and toes. The
heads of the metatarsals are palpable in the
ball of the foot. In the forefoot, identify
the metatarsophalangeal joints, proximal to
the webs of the toes, and the PIP and DIP
joints of the toes.

Anterior
talofibular ligament

Lateral
malleolus

Transverse tarsal joint
Posterior
talofibular
ligament

Navicular bone
Cuneiforms
First metatarsal
Metatarsophalangeal
joint

Proximal
phalanx

Calcaneofibular
ligament
Cuboid

Distal
phalanx

F I G U R E 1 6 - 8 6 . Ankle, lateral view.

Muscle Groups and Additional Structures. Movement at the ankle
(tibiotalar) joint is limited to dorsiﬂexion and plantar ﬂexion. Plantar ﬂexion is
powered by the gastrocnemius, the posterior tibial muscle, and the toe ﬂexors.
Their tendons run behind the malleoli. The dorsiﬂexors include the anterior tibial
muscle and the toe extensors. They lie prominently on the anterior surface, or
dorsum, of the ankle, anterior to the malleoli.

Ligaments extend from each malleolus onto the foot.
■ Medially, the triangle-shaped deltoid ligament fans out from the inferior surface

of the medial malleolus to the talus and proximal tarsal bones, protecting
against stress from eversion (heel bows outward).
■ Laterally, the three ligaments are less substantial, with higher risk for injury:

the anterior taloﬁbular ligament, most at risk in injury from inversion (heel
bows inward) injuries; the calcaneoﬁbular ligament; and the posterior taloﬁbular ligament (Fig. 16-86). The strong Achilles tendon attaches the gastrocnemius and soleus muscles to the posterior calcaneus. The plantar fascia inserts
on the medial tubercle of the calcaneus.
C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

691

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Techniques of Examination
Inspection. Observe all surfaces of the ankles and feet, noting any deformities, nodules, swelling, calluses, or corns.

See Table 16-9, Abnormalities of the
Feet (p. 706) and Table 16-10, Abnormalities of the Toes and Soles (p. 707).

Palpation. With your thumbs,
palpate the anterior aspect of each ankle
joint, noting any bogginess, swelling, or
tenderness (Fig. 16-87).

Localized tenderness is often present
in arthritis, ligamentous injury, or
infection.

Feel along the Achilles tendon for nodules and tenderness.

Check for rheumatoid nodules and
tenderness, commonly found in Achilles tendinitis, bursitis, or partial tear
from trauma.

Palpate the heel, especially the posterior and inferior calcaneus, and the
plantar fascia for tenderness. Bone
spurs are common on the calcaneus.

Focal heel tenderness at the attachment
site of the plantar fascia is typical of
plantar fasciitis; risk factors are anatomic
(overpronation, flat feet), improper footwear, excessive use, and overtraining
with prolonged heel-strike exercise.
Presence or absence of a heel spur does
not change the diagnosis.86

FIGURE 16-87.
anterior ankle joint.

Palpate the

Palpate for tenderness over the medial and lateral ankle ligaments and the medial
and lateral malleolus, especially in cases of trauma. In trauma, the distal tip of
the tibia and ﬁbula should also be palpated.

Most ankle sprains involve foot inversion and injury to the weaker lateral
ligaments (anterior talofibular and
calcaneofibular), with overlying tenderness, swelling, and ecchymosis.
After trauma, pain in the malleolar
zone plus either bone tenderness over
the posterior aspects of either malleolus (or over the navicular or base of
the fifth metatarsal) or an inability to
bear weight for four steps is suspicious for ankle fracture and warrants
radiography (known as the Ottawa
ankle and foot rules).87–89

Palpate the metatarsophalangeal (MTP)
joints for tenderness (Fig. 16-88).
Compress the forefoot between the
thumb and ﬁngers. Exert pressure just
proximal to the heads of the ﬁrst and
ﬁfth metatarsals.

Tenderness along the posterior
medial malleolus is seen in posterior
tibial tendinitis.
Tenderness on compression is an early
sign of RA. Acute inflammation of the
first MTP joint is common in gout.

FIGURE 16-88.
joints.

692

Palpate the MTP

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Palpate the heads of the ﬁve metatarsals and the
grooves between them with your thumb and
index ﬁnger (Fig. 16-89). Place your thumb on
the dorsum of the foot and your index ﬁnger on
the plantar surface.

Pain and tenderness, called metatarsalgia, occurs in trauma, arthritis, and
vascular compromise.
Tenderness over the third and fourth
metatarsal heads on the plantar surface is suspicious for Morton neuroma
(see p. 706).

F I G U R E 1 6 - 8 9 . Palpate
the metatarsal heads.

Forefoot abnormalities like hallux valgus, metatarsalgia, and Morton neuroma
are more common with wear of highheeled shoes with narrow toe boxes.

Range of Motion and Maneuvers
Range of Motion. Assess flexion and extension at the tibiotalar (ankle)
joint. In the foot, assess inversion and eversion at the subtalar and transverse
tarsal joints.

Ankle and Foot Range of Motion
Ankle and Foot
Movement

Primary Muscles
Affecting Movement

Ankle Flexion
(Plantar Flexion)
Ankle Extension
(Dorsiﬂexion)

Gastrocnemius, soleus,
“Point your foot toward the
plantaris, tibialis posterior
ﬂoor.”
Tibialis anterior, extensor
“Point your foot toward the
digitorum longus, and
ceiling.”
extensor hallucis longus
Tibialis posterior and anterior “Bend your heel inward.”
Peroneus longus and brevis “Bend your heel outward.”

Inversion
Eversion

Patient Instructions

Maneuvers
■ The ankle (tibiotalar) joint. Dorsiﬂex and plantar ﬂex the foot at the ankle.

Pain during movements of the ankle
and the foot helps to localize possible
arthritis.

■ The subtalar (talocalcaneal) joint. Stabilize the ankle with one hand, grasp the

An arthritic joint frequently causes pain
when moved in any direction, whereas
a ligamentous sprain produces pain
when the ligament is stretched. For
example, often, ankle sprain inversion
with plantar flexion of the foot causes
pain, whereas eversion with plantar
flexion is relatively pain free.

heel with the other, and invert and evert the foot by turning the heel inward
then outward (Figs. 16-90 and 16-91).

FIGURE 16-90.

Invert the heel.

FIGURE 16-91.

Evert the heel.

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

693

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

EXAMINATION OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
■ The transverse tarsal joint. Stabilize the heel and invert and evert the forefoot

(Figs. 16-92 and 16-93).

FIGURE 16-92.
forefoot.

Invert the

FIGURE 16-93.
forefoot.

Evert the

■ The metatarsophalangeal joints. Move the proximal phalanx of each toe up and

down.

Pain suggests acute synovitis. Instability occurs in chronic synovitis and
claw-toe deformity.

Special Techniques
Measuring the Length of Legs. To measure leg length, the patient
should be relaxed in the supine position and symmetrically aligned with legs
extended. With a tape, measure the distance between the anterior superior iliac
spine and the medial malleolus (Fig. 16-94). The tape should cross the knee on
its medial side.

FIGURE 16-94.

Measured leg length is the same in
scoliosis.

Measure leg length.

Describing Limited Motion of a Joint. Use a goniometer to
measure range of motion in degrees. In Figures 16-95 and 16-96, the red
lines show the range of the patient’s range of motion, and the black lines
show the normal range.

Observations may be described in several ways. The numbers in parentheses
show abbreviated descriptions.
694

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS

160°
Neutral
0°
30°
45°
90°

45°
90°

90°
0°

FIGURE 16-95.
elbow ﬂexion.

Degrees of

F I G U R E 1 6 - 9 6 . Degrees of
elbow supination and pronation.

A. The elbow ﬂexes from 45° to 90°
(45° → 90°),
-or-

B. Supination at elbow = 30°
(0° → 30°)
Pronation at elbow = 45°
(0° → 45°)

The elbow has a ﬂexion deformity
of 45° and can be ﬂexed farther to
90° (45° → 90°).

Recording Your Findings
Use anatomical terms speciﬁc to the structure and function of individual joint
problems to make your write-up of musculoskeletal ﬁndings more meaningful
and informative.
Recording the Examination—The
Musculoskeletal System
“Full range of motion in all joints of the upper and lower extremities. No evidence
of swelling or deformity.”
OR
“Full range of motion in all joints. Hand with Heberden nodes at the DIP joints,
Bouchard nodes at PIP joints. Mild pain with ﬂexion, extension, and rotation of
both hips. Full range of motion in the knees, with moderate crepitus; no eﬀusion but bony enlargement along the tibiofemoral joint line bilaterally. Both feet
with hallux valgus at the ﬁrst MTP joints.”
OR
“Right knee with moderate eﬀusion and tenderness over medial meniscus
along the joint line. Moderate laxity of ACL on Lachman test; PCL, MCL, and
LCL intact—no posterior drawer sign or tenderness with varus or valgus stress.
Patellar tendon intact—patient able to extend lower extremity. All other joints
with good range of motion; no other deformity or swelling.”

C H A P T E R 16

These findings suggest OA.

These findings suggest partial tear of
medial meniscus and ACL, possibly
from sports injury or trauma and
require prompt evaluation.

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

695

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 16-1 Patterns of Pain in and Around the Joints
Common
Locations

Pattern of
Spread

Hands—initially
small joints (PIP
and MCP joints),
feet (MTP joints),
wrists, knees, elbows, ankles

Symmetrically addi- Usually insidious;
tive: progresses to
human leukocyte
other joints while
antigen (HLA) and
persisting in initial non-HLA genes acjoints
count for >50% of
risk of disease; involves proinﬂammatory cytokines

Problem

Process

Rheumatoid
Arthritis8–10

Chronic inﬂammation of synovial membranes with secondary erosion of adjacent cartilage and
bone, and damage
to ligaments and
tendons

Osteoarthritis
(Degenerative
Joint Disease)12

Degeneration and
Knees, hips, hands Additive; however,
progressive loss of (distal, sometimes may involve only
joint cartilage from PIP joints), cervical one joint.
mechanical stress, and lumbar spine,
with damage to un- and wrists (ﬁrst carderlying bone, and pometacarpal joint);
formation of new
also joints previbone at the cartilage ously injured or
margins
diseased

Gouty Arthritis7,91
An inﬂammatory
Acute Gout
reaction to microcrystals of monosodium urate

Base of the big toe Early attacks usu(the ﬁrst MTP
ally conﬁned to one
joint), the instep or joint
dorsa of feet, the
ankles, knees, and
elbows

Onset

Progression
and Duration
Often chronic (in
>50%), with remissions and exacerbations

Usually insidious;
Slowly progressive,
genetics may acwith temporary excount for >50% of acerbations after
risk of disease; re- periods of overuse
petitive injury and
obesity increase risk

Sudden; often at
Occasional isolated atnight; often after in- tacks lasting days up
jury, surgery, fastto 2 wks; they may get
ing, or excessive
more frequent and sefood or alcohol
vere, with persisting
intake
symptoms
Chronic symptoms
with acute exacerbations

Chronic Tophaceous Gout

Multiple local accu- Feet, ankles, wrists, Additive, not so
mulations of sodium ﬁngers, and elbows symmetric as RA
urate in the joints
and other tissues
(tophi), with or without inﬂammation

Gradual development of chronicity
with repeated attacks

Polymyalgia
Rheumatica11

A disease of unclear Muscles of the hip,
etiology in people
shoulder girdle, and
older than age 50
neck; symmetric
yrs, especially
women; overlaps
with giant cell arteritis

Insidious or abrupt, Chronic but ultieven appearing
mately self-limiting
overnight

Fibromyalgia
Syndrome90

Widespread muscu- Multiple speciﬁc
Shifts unpredictably Variable
loskeletal pain and and symmetric “ten- or worsens in retender points. Cen- der points,” often
sponse to immobiltral pain sensitivity unrecognized until ity, excessive use, or
syndrome that may examined; especially exposure to cold
involve aberrant
in the neck, shoulpain signaling and ders, hands, low
ampliﬁcation
back, and knees

696

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Chronic, with “ups
and downs”

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Associated Symptoms
Swelling

Redness, Warmth,
and Tenderness

Limitation of
Motion

Stiffness

Generalized
Symptoms

Frequent swelling of sy- Tender, often warm, but
novial tissue in joints or seldom red
tendon sheaths; also subcutaneous nodules

Prominent, often for an
hour or more in the
mornings, also after
inactivity

Small joint effusions may
be present, especially in
the knees; also bony enlargement

Frequent but brief (usu- Often develops
ally 5–10 min), in the
morning and after inactivity

Usually absent

Exquisitely tender, hot,
Present, within and
around the involved joint, and red
usually in men (have
higher serum urate levels); often polyarticular
later in course

Not evident

Motion is limited primarily by pain

Fever may be present;
also consider also septic
arthritis

Present as tophi in joints, Tenderness, warmth,
bursae, and subcutaneous and redness may be
tissues; check ears and
present during exacerextensor surfaces for
bations
tophi

Present

Present

Possibly fever; patients
may also develop renal
failure and renal stones

Swelling and edema may
be present over dorsum
of hands, wrists, feet

Muscles often tender,
but not warm or red

Prominent, especially in Pain restricts movethe morning
ment, especially in
shoulders

None

Multiple speciﬁc and
symmetric tender “trigger points,” often not
recognized until the
examination

Present, especially in
the morning—often
confused with inﬂammatory conditions

Possibly tender, seldom
warm, and rarely red.
Inﬂammation may accompany disease ﬂares
and progression

Often develops; affected Weakness, fatigue,
by associated joint con- weight loss, and low
tractures and subluxfever are common
ation, bursitis, and
tendinopathy

Malaise, depression, anorexia, weight loss, and
fever, but no true weakness

Absent, though stiffness Sleep disturbance, usuis greater at the exally with fatigue on
tremes of movement
awakening; overlaps
with depression and
other pain syndromes

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

697

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 16-2 Pains in the Neck
Patterns
Mechanical Neck Pain
Aching pain in the cervical
paraspinal muscles and ligaments
with associated muscle spasm and
stiffness and tightness in the upper
back and shoulder, lasting up to 6
wks. No associated radiation,
paresthesias, or weakness.
Headache may be present.
Mechanical Neck Pain—
Whiplash18,19
Mechanical neck pain with aching
paracervical pain and stiffness,
often beginning the day after injury.
Occipital headache, dizziness,
malaise, and fatigue may be
present. Chronic whiplash
syndrome if symptoms last more
than 6 mo; occurs in 20%–40% of
injuries.
Cervical Radiculopathy—from
Nerve Root Compression18,19
Sharp burning or tingling pain in
the neck and one arm, with
associated paresthesias and
weakness. Sensory symptoms often
in myotomal pattern, deep in
muscle, rather than dermatomal
pattern.
Cervical Myelopathy—from
Cervical Cord Compression18,19
Neck pain with bilateral weakness
and paresthesias in both upper and
lower extremities, often with
urinary frequency. Hand
clumsiness, palmar paresthesias,
and gait changes may be subtle.
Neck ﬂexion often exacerbates
symptoms.

698

Possible Causes

Physical Signs

Mechanism poorly understood, possibly
sustained muscle contraction. Associated
with poor posture, stress, poor sleep, poor
head position during activities such as
computer use, watching television, and
driving.

Local muscle tenderness, pain on
movement. No neurologic deﬁcits. Possible
trigger points in ﬁbromyalgia. Torticollis if
prolonged abnormal neck posture and
muscle spasm.

Musculoligamentous sprain or strain from
forced hyperﬂexion—hyperextension
injury to the neck, as in rear-end collisions.

Localized paracervical tenderness,
decreased neck range of motion, perceived
weakness of the upper extremities. Causes
of cervical cord compression such as
fracture, herniation, head injury, or altered
consciousness are excluded.

Dysfunction of cervical spinal nerve,
nerve roots, or both from foraminal
encroachment of the spinal nerve (∼75%),
herniated cervical disc (∼25%). Rarely
from tumor, syrinx, or multiple sclerosis.
Mechanisms may involve hypoxia of the
nerve root and dorsal ganglion and release
of inﬂammatory mediators.

C7 nerve root affected most often (45–60%),
with weakness in triceps and ﬁnger ﬂexors
and extensors. C6 nerve root involvement
also common, with weakness in biceps,
brachioradialis, wrist extensors.

Usually from cervical spondylosis, deﬁned
as cervical degenerative disc disease from
spurs, protrusion of ligamentum ﬂavum,
and/or disc herniation (∼80%); also from
cervical stenosis from osteophytes,
ossiﬁcation of ligamentum ﬂavum, and RA.
Large central or paracentral disc herniation
may also compress cord.

Hyperreﬂexia; clonus at the wrist, knee, or
ankle; extensor plantar reﬂexes (positive
Babinski signs); and gait disturbances. May
also see Lhermitte sign: neck ﬂexion with
resulting sensation of electrical shock
radiating down the spine. Conﬁrmation of
cervical myelopathy warrants neck
immobilization and neurosurgical
evaluation.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 16-3 Low Back Pain
Patterns
Mechanical Low Back Pain4,20,21,24,28
Aching pain in the lumbosacral area; may radiate
into lower leg, especially in L5 (lateral leg) or S1
(posterior leg) dermatomes. Signiﬁes anatomic or
functional abnormality in absence of neoplastic,
infectious, or inﬂammatory disease. Usually
acute (<3 mo), idiopathic, benign, and selflimiting; represents 97% of symptomatic low
back pain. Commonly work related and
occurring in patients 30–50 yrs. Risk factors
include heavy lifting, poor conditioning, obesity.
Sciatica (Radicular Low Back Pain)4,21,57
Shooting pain below the knee, commonly into
the lateral leg (L5) or posterior calf (S1);
typically accompanies low back pain, often with
associated paresthesias and weakness. Bending,
sneezing, coughing, straining during bowel
movements can worsen the pain.

Lumbar Spinal Stenosis92,93
Neurogenic claudication with gluteal and/or
lower extremity pain and/or fatigue that may
occur with or without back pain. Pain is
provoked by lumbar extension (as in walking
uphill) due to reduced space in the lumbar spine
from degenerative changes in the spinal canal.
Positive LR is >6.0 if pain is absent when seated,
improved with bending forward, or present in
both buttocks and legs. Positive LR is <4.0 if gait
is wide-based and Romberg test is abnormal.

Possible Causes

Physical Signs

Often arises from muscle and ligament
injuries (∼70%) or age-related
intervertebral disc or facet disease (∼4%).
Causes also include herniated disc (∼4%),
spinal stenosis (∼3%), compression
fractures (∼4%), and spondylolisthesis
(2%).

Paraspinal muscle or facet tenderness,
pain with back movement, loss of
normal lumbar lordosis; motor,
sensory, and reﬂex ﬁndings are
normal. In osteoporosis, check for
thoracic kyphosis, percussion
tenderness over a spinous process, or
fractures in the thoracic spine or hip.90

Sciatic pain is sensitive, ∼95%, and speciﬁc,
∼88%, for disc herniation. Usually from
herniated intervertebral disc with
compression or traction of nerve root(s) in
people ages 50 yrs or older. L5 and S1 roots
are involved in ∼95% of disc herniations; root
or spinal cord compression from neoplastic
conditions in fewer than 1% of cases. Tumor
or midline disc herniation may cause bowel
or bladder dysfunction, leg weakness from
cauda equina syndrome (S2–S4).

Disc herniation most likely if calf
wasting, weak ankle dorsiﬂexion,
absent ankle jerk, positive crossed
straight-leg raise (pain in affected leg
when healthy leg tested); negative
straight-leg raise makes diagnosis
highly unlikely. Ipsilateral straight-leg
raise sensitive, about 65–98%, but not
speciﬁc, about 10–60%.

Arises from hypertrophic degenerative
disease of one or more vertebral facets and
thickening of the ligamentum ﬂavum,
causing narrowing of the spinal canal
centrally or in lateral recesses. More
common after age 60 yrs.

Posture may be ﬂexed forward to
reduce symptoms, with lower
extremity weakness and hyporeﬂexia.
Thigh pain typically occurs after 30 s
of lumbar extension. Straight-leg raise
is usually negative.

Chronic Back Stiffness70,94

Ankylosing spondylitis, an inﬂammatory
polyarthritis, most common in men
younger than 40 yrs. Diffuse idiopathic
hyperostosis (DISH) affects men more than
women, usually age ≥50 yrs.

Nocturnal Back Pain,
Unrelieved by Rest4

Consider metastatic malignancy to the
spine from cancer of the prostate, breast,
lung, thyroid, and kidney, and multiple
myeloma.

Loss of the normal lumbar lordosis,
muscle spasm, limited anterior and
lateral ﬂexion. Lateral immobility of the
spine, especially in thoracic area improves
with exercise.

Peptic ulcer, pancreatitis, pancreatic
cancer, chronic prostatitis, endometriosis,
dissecting aortic aneurysm, retroperitoneal
tumor, and other causes.

Variable with the source. Local
vertebral tenderness may be present.
Spinal movements are not painful and
range of motion is not affected. Look
for signs of the primary disorder.

Pain Referred from the Abdomen or
Pelvis
Usually a deep, aching pain; the level varies
with the source. Accounts for ∼2% of low back
pain.

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

699

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 16-4 Painful Shoulders

Rotator Cuff Tendinitis (Impingement Syndrome)
Repeated shoulder motion, for example, from throwing or
swimming, can cause edema and hemorrhage followed by
inﬂammation, most commonly involving the supraspinatus tendon.
Acute, recurrent, or chronic pain may result, often aggravated by
activity. Patients report sharp catches of pain, grating, and weakness
when lifting the arm overhead. When the supraspinatus tendon is
involved, tenderness is maximal just below the tip of the acromion. In
older adults, bone spurs on the undersurface of the acromion may
contribute to symptoms.

Shouldershrugging effort

Limited abduction

Normal abduction

Rotator Cuff Tears
The rotator cuff muscles and tendons compress the humeral head
into the concave glenoid fossa and strengthen arm movement—the
subscapularis in internal rotation, the supraspinatus in elevation, and
the infraspinatus and teres minor in external rotation. Injury from a
fall, trauma, or repeated impingement against the acromion and the
coracoacromial ligament may cause a partial- or full-thickness tear of
the rotator cuff, the most common clinical problem of the shoulder,
especially in older patients. Patients complain of chronic shoulder
pain, night pain, or catching and grating when raising the arm
overhead. Weakness or tears of the tendons usually start in the
supraspinatus tendon and progress posteriorly and anteriorly. Look
for atrophy of the deltoid, supraspinatus, or infraspinatus muscles.
Palpate anteriorly over the anterior greater tuberosity of the humerus
to check for a defect in muscle attachment and below the acromion
for crepitus during arm rotation. In a complete tear, active abduction
and forward ﬂexion at the glenohumeral joint are severely impaired,
producing a characteristic shrug of the shoulder and a positive “drop
arm” test (see p. 655).

Calciﬁc Tendinitis
Calciﬁc tendinitis is a degenerative process in the tendon associated
with the deposition of calcium salts that usually involves the
supraspinatus tendon. Acute disabling attacks of shoulder pain may
occur, usually in patients ages ≥30 yrs, especially in women. The arm
is held close to the side, and all motions are severely limited by pain.
Tenderness is maximal below the tip of the acromion. The subacromial
bursa, which overlies the supraspinatus tendon, may be inﬂamed.
Chronic less severe pain may also occur.

700

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Bicipital Tendinitis
Inﬂammation of the long head of the biceps tendon and tendon
sheath causes anterior shoulder pain resembling and often coexisting
with rotator cuff tendinitis. Both conditions may involve
impingement injury. Tenderness is maximal in the bicipital groove.
Externally rotate and abduct the arm to separate this area from the
subacromial tenderness of supraspinatus tendinitis. With the patient’s
arm at the side, elbow ﬂexed to 90°, ask the patient to supinate the
forearm against your resistance. Increased pain in the bicipital groove
conﬁrms this condition. Pain during resisted forward ﬂexion of the
shoulder with the elbow extended is also characteristic.
Adhesive Capsulitis (Frozen Shoulder)
Adhesive capsulitis refers to ﬁbrosis of the glenohumeral joint
capsule, manifested by diffuse, dull, aching pain in the shoulder and
progressive restriction of active and passive range of motion, especially in
external rotation, with localized tenderness. The condition is usually
unilateral and occurs in people ages 40–60 yrs. There is often an
antecedent disorder of the shoulder or another condition (such as
myocardial infarction) that has decreased shoulder movements.
The disorder may take 6 mo to 2 yrs to resolve. Stretching exercises
may help.

Acromioclavicular Arthritis
Acromioclavicular arthritis is relatively common, usually arising from
prior direct injury to the shoulder girdle with resulting degenerative
changes. Tenderness is localized over the acromioclavicular joint. Patients
report pain with movements of the scapula and arm abduction.

Anterior Dislocation of the Humerus
Shoulder instability from anterior subluxation or dislocation of the
humerus usually results from a fall or forceful throwing motion, then
can become common unless treated or the precipitating motion is
avoided. The shoulder seems to “slip out of the joint” when the arm
is abducted and externally rotated, causing a positive apprehension sign
for anterior instability when the examiner places the arm in this
position. Any shoulder movement may cause pain, and patients hold
the arm in a neutral position. The rounded lateral aspect of the
shoulder appears ﬂattened. Dislocations may also be inferior,
posterior (relatively rare), and multidirectional.

Coracoid process
Acromion

Glenoid
fossa

Humerus

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

701

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 16-5 Swollen or Tender Elbows

Olecranon Bursitis
Swelling and inﬂammation of the olecranon bursa may result from trauma,
gout, or rheumatoid arthritis (RA). The swelling is superﬁcial to the
olecranon process and may reach 6 cm in diameter. Consider aspiration for
both diagnosis and symptomatic relief.

Olecranon
bursitis

Rheumatoid Nodules
Subcutaneous nodules may develop at pressure points along the extensor
surface of the ulna in patients with RA or acute rheumatic fever. They are
ﬁrm and nontender. They are not attached to the overlying skin but may be
attached to the underlying periosteum. They can develop in the area of the
olecranon bursa, but often occur more distally.

Rheumatoid
nodules

Arthritis of the Elbow
Synovial inﬂammation or ﬂuid is felt best in the grooves between the
olecranon process and the epicondyles on either side. Palpate for a boggy,
soft, or ﬂuctuant swelling and for tenderness. Causes include RA, gout and
pseudogout, osteoarthritis, and trauma. Patients report pain, stiffness, and
restricted motion.
Arthritis

Epicondylitis

702

Epicondylitis
Lateral epicondylitis (tennis elbow) follows repetitive extension of the wrist or
pronation–supination of the forearm. Pain and tenderness develop 1 cm distal to
the lateral epicondyle and possibly in the extensor muscles close to it. When
the patient tries to extend the wrist against resistance, pain increases.
Medial epicondylitis (pitcher’s, golfer’s, or Little League elbow) follows
repetitive wrist ﬂexion such as throwing. Tenderness is maximal just lateral and
distal to the medial epicondyle. Wrist ﬂexion against resistance increases the
pain.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 16-6 Arthritis in the Hands

Tender,
swollen

Ulnar
deviation
Swollen,
thickened
Boutonnière deformity

Rheumatoid
nodule

Muscular atrophy

Swan neck deformity

Radial deviation of distal phalanx
Heberden
node

Bouchard
node

Metacarpophalangeal
joints uninvolved

Swollen

Draining tophus

Knobby swelling

Acute Rheumatoid Arthritis
Tender, painful, stiff joints in RA, usually with
symmetric involvement on both sides of the
body. The distal interphalangeal (DIP),
metacarpophalangeal (MCP), and wrist joints are
the most frequently affected. Note the fusiform
or spindle-shaped swelling of the PIP joints in
acute disease.

Chronic Rheumatoid Arthritis
In chronic disease, note the swelling and
thickening of the MCP and PIP joints. Range of
motion becomes limited, and ﬁngers may deviate
toward the ulnar side. The interosseous muscles
atrophy. The ﬁngers may show “swan neck”
deformities (hyperextension of the PIP joints with
ﬁxed ﬂexion of the distal interphalangeal [DIP]
joints). Less common is a boutonnière deformity
(persistent ﬂexion of the PIP joint with
hyperextension of the DIP joint). Rheumatoid
nodules are seen in the acute or the chronic stage.
Osteoarthritis (Degenerative Joint
Disease)
Heberden nodes on the dorsolateral aspects of the
DIP joints from bony overgrowth of OA. Usually
hard and painless, they affect middle-ages or
older adults; they are often associated with
arthritic changes in other joints. Flexion and
deviation deformities may develop. Bouchard
nodes on the PIP joints are less common. The
MCP joints are spared.

Chronic Tophaceous Gout8
Urate crystal deposits, often with surrounding
inﬂammation, cause deformities in subcutaneous
tissues, bursae, cartilage, and subchondral bone
that mimic RA and OA. Joint involvement is
usually less symmetric than in RA. Acute
inﬂammation may be present. Knobby swellings
around the joints ulcerate and discharge white
chalk-like urates.

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

703

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 16-7 Swellings and Deformities of the Hands
Flexion contraction

Dupuytren Contracture
The ﬁrst sign of a Dupuytren contracture is a thickened band overlying the ﬂexor tendon
of the fourth ﬁnger and possibly the little ﬁnger near the distal palmar crease.
Subsequently, the skin in this area puckers, and a thickened ﬁbrotic cord develops
between the palm and ﬁnger. Finger extension is limited, but ﬂexion is usually normal.
Flexion contracture of the ﬁngers may gradually develop.

Cord

Trigger Finger
Trigger ﬁnger is caused by a painless nodule in a ﬂexor tendon in the palm, near the
metacarpal head. The nodule is too big to enter easily into the tendon sheath during
extension of the ﬁngers from a ﬂexed position. With extra effort or assistance, the ﬁnger
extends and ﬂexes with a palpable and audible snap as the nodule pops into the tendon
sheath. Watch, listen, and palpate the nodule as the patient ﬂexes and extends the ﬁngers.

Thenar Atrophy
Thenar atrophy suggests a median nerve disorder such as carpal tunnel syndrome (see
p. 664). Hypothenar atrophy suggests an ulnar nerve disorder.

Normal
hypothenar
eminence
Flattened
thenar
eminence

Ganglion
Ganglia are cystic, round, usually nontender swellings along tendon sheaths or joint
capsules, frequently at the dorsum of the wrist. The cyst contains synovial ﬂuid arising
from erosion or tearing of the joint capsule or tendon sheath and trapped in the cystic
cavity. Flexion of the wrist makes ganglia more prominent; extension tends to obscure
them. Ganglia may also develop on the hands, wrists, ankles, and feet. They can
disappear spontaneously.

Cystic swelling

704

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 16-8 Tendon
Sheath, Palmar Space, and
Finger Infections

Pain on extension

Swelling and
tenderness along
tendon sheath

Acute Tenosynovitis
Inﬂammation of the ﬂexor tendon sheaths, acute tenosynovitis, may follow
local injury, overuse, or infection. Unlike arthritis, tenderness and swelling
develop not in the joint but along the course of the tendon sheath, from the
distal phalanx to the level of the metacarpophalangeal joint. The ﬁnger is held
in slight ﬂexion; ﬁnger extension is very painful. Causative infectious agents
include Staphylococcus and Streptococcus species, disseminated gonorrhea, and
Candida albicans.

Finger held
in slight flexion
Puncture wound

Acute Tenosynovitis and Thenar Space Involvement
If the infection progresses, it may extend from the tendon sheath into the
adjacent fascial spaces within the palm. Infections of the index ﬁnger and
thenar space are illustrated. Early diagnosis and treatment are important.

Tender, swollen

Puncture wound

Swollen, tender,
dusky red

Felon
Injury to the ﬁngertip may result in infection of the enclosed fascial spaces of
the distal pulp or phalanx pad of the ﬁngertip, usually from Staphylococcus
aureus. Severe pain, localized tenderness, swelling, and dusky redness are
characteristics. Early diagnosis and treatment, usually incision and drainage,
are important for preventing abscess formation. If vesicles are present,
consider herpetic whitlow instead, usually seen in health care workers exposed
to herpes simplex virus in human saliva.

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

705

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 16-9 Abnormalities of the Feet

Acute Gouty Arthritis
The metatarsophalangeal joint of the great toe is the initial site of attack in 50% of the
episodes of acute gouty arthritis. It is characterized by a very painful and tender, hot,
dusky red swelling that extends beyond the margin of the joint. It is easily mistaken for a
cellulitis. The ankle, tarsal joints, and knee are also commonly involved.

Hot, red, tender, swollen

Medial border
becomes convex

Sole touches floor

Flat Feet
Signs of ﬂat feet may be apparent only when the patient stands, or they may become
permanent. The longitudinal arch ﬂattens so that the sole approaches or touches the ﬂoor.
The normal concavity on the medial side of the foot becomes convex. Tenderness may be
present from the medial malleolus down along the medial plantar surface of the foot.
Swelling may develop anterior to the malleoli. Flat feet may be a normal variant or arise
from posterior tibial tendon dysfunction, seen in obesity, diabetes, and prior foot injury.
Inspect the shoes for excess wear on the inner sides of the soles and heels.
Hallux Valgus
In hallux valgus, there is lateral deviation of the great toe and enlargement of the head of
the ﬁrst metatarsal on its medial side, forming a bursa or bunion. This bursa may become
inﬂamed. Women are 10 times more likely to be affected than men.

Morton
neuroma

706

Morton Neuroma
Look for tenderness over the plantar surface between the third and fourth metatarsal
heads, from perineural ﬁbrosis of the common digital nerve due to repetitive nerve
irritation (not a true neuroma). Check for pain radiating to the toes when you press on
the plantar interspace and squeeze the metatarsals with your other hand. Symptoms
include hyperesthesia, numbness, aching, and burning from the metatarsal heads into the
third and fourth toes.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 16-10 Abnormalities of the Toes and Soles
Red, tender

Hyperextended

Red, thickened

Granulation
tissue
Flexed

Ingrown Toenail
The sharp edge of a toenail may dig into
and injure the lateral nail fold, resulting
in inﬂammation and infection. A tender,
reddened, overhanging nail fold,
sometimes with granulation tissue and
purulent discharge, results. The great toe
is most often affected.

Hammer Toe
Usually involving the second toe, a
hammer toe is characterized by hyperextension at the metatarsophalangeal
joint with ﬂexion at the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint. A corn frequently develops at the pressure point
over the PIP joint.

Corn
A corn is a painful conical thickening of
skin that results from recurrent pressure
on normally thin skin. The apex of the
cone points inward and causes pain.
Corns characteristically occur over bony
prominences such as the ﬁfth toe. When
located in moist areas such as pressure
points between the fourth and ﬁfth toes,
they are called soft corns.

Callus
Like a corn, a callus is an area of greatly
thickened skin that develops in a region
of recurrent pressure. Unlike a corn, a
callus involves skin that is normally
thick, such as the sole, and is usually
painless. If a callus is painful, suspect an
underlying plantar wart.

Plantar Wart
A plantar wart is a hyperkeratotic lesion
caused by human papillomavirus, located
on the sole of the foot. It may look like
a callus. Look for the characteristic
small dark spots that give a stippled
appearance to a wart. Normal skin lines
stop at the wart’s edge. It is tender if
pinched side to side, whereas a callus is
tender to direct pressure.

Neuropathic Ulcer
When pain sensation is diminished or
absent, as in diabetic neuropathy,
neuropathic ulcers may develop at
pressure points on the feet. Although
often deep, infected, and indolent, they
are painless. Underlying osteomyelitis
and amputation may ensue. Early
detection of loss of sensation using a
nylon ﬁlament is the standard of care in
diabetes.

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

707

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
REFERENCES

References
1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National ambulatory
medical care survey: 2012 State and National Summary Tables:
Table 15, Primary diagnosis at ofﬁce visits, classiﬁed by major disease category: United States, 2012; Table 16, Twenty leading primary diagnosis groups for ofﬁce visits: United States, 2012.
Available at http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/ahcd/namcs_summary/2012_namcs_web_tables.pdf. Accessed September 7, 2015.
2. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Arthritis-related statistics. Updated March 17, 2014. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/
arthritis/data_statistics/arthritis_related_stats.htm#1. Accessed
September 8, 2015.
3. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Summary Health Statistics for U.S. Adults: National Health Interview Survey, 2010.
Table 9. Frequencies of migraines and pain in neck, lower back, face,
or jaw among persons aged 18 and over… p. 40. http://www.cdc.
gov/nchs/data/series/sr_10/sr10_252.pdf. Accessed September 8,
2015.
4. Chou R. In the clinic. Low back pain. Ann Intern Med. 2014;
160:ITC6–1.
5. Cush JJ, Lipsky PE. In: Longo DL, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, et al. (eds).
Chapter 331, Approach to Articular and Musculoskeletal Disorders,
in Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. 18th ed. New York:
McGraw-Hill; 2012.
6. Carpenter CR, Schuur JD, Everett WW, et al. Evidence-based diagnostics: adult septic arthritis. Acad Emerg Med. 2011;18:781.
7. Mead T, Arabindoo K, Smith B. Managing gout: there’s more we
can do. J Fam Pract. 2014;63:707.
8. American College of Physicians. Approach to the Patient with
Rheumatic Disease, in Rheumatology. Collier V (ed), Medical
Knowledge Self-Assessment Program (MKSAP) 16. Philadelphia, PA:
American College of Physicians; 2012.
9. Anderson J, Caplan L, Yazdany J, et al. Rheumatoid arthritis disease activity measures: American College of Rheumatology recommendations for use in clinical practice. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken).
2012;64:640.
10. Davis JM 3rd, Matteson EL; American College of Rheumatology;
European League Against Rheumatism. My treatment approach to
rheumatoid arthritis. Mayo Clin Proc. 2012;87:659.
11. Dejaco C, Singh YP, Perel P, et al. 2015 Recommendations for the
management of polymyalgia rheumatica: a European League
Against Rheumatism/American College of Rheumatology collaborative initiative. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2015;67:2569.
12. Gelber AC. In the clinic. Osteoarthritis. Ann Intern Med. 2014;
161:ITC1–1.
13. Davatchi F. Behçet’s disease. Int J Rheum Dis. 2014;17:355.
14. Hatemi G, Yaziel Y, Yazici H. Behçet’s syndrome. Rheum Dis N Am.
2013:39:245.
15. Michaleff ZA, Maher CG, Verhagen AP, et al. Accuracy of the Canadian C-spine rule and NEXUS to screen for clinically important
cervical spine injury in patients following blunt trauma: a systematic review. CMAJ. 2012;184:E867.
16. Hoffman JR, Mower WR, Wolfson AB, et al. Validity of a set of
clinical criteria to rule out injury to the cervical spine in patients
with blunt trauma. N Engl J Med. 2000;343:94.
17. Stiell IG, Wells GA, Vandemheen KL, et al. The Canadian C-spine
rule for radiography in alert and stable trauma patients. JAMA.
2001;286:1841.

708

18. Bono CM, Ghiselli G, Gilbert TJ, et al; North American Spine Society. An evidence-based clinical guideline for the diagnosis and
treatment of cervical radiculopathy from degenerative disorders.
Spine J. 2011;11:64.
19. Onks CA, Billy G. Evaluation and treatment of cervical radiculopathy. Prim Care. 2013;40:837.
20. Rozenberg S, Foltz V, Fautrel B. Treatment strategy for chronic low
back pain. Joint Bone Spine. 2012;79:555.
21. Ropper AH, Zafonte RD. Sciatica. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:1240.
22. Lurie JD, Gerber PD, Sox HC. Clinical problem-solving. A pain in
the back. N Engl J Med. 2000;343:723.
23. Deyo RA. Biopsychosocial care for chronic back pain. Supporting
evidence looks promising but far from complete. BMJ. 2015;350:
h538.
24. Chou R, Shekelle P. Will this patient develop persistent disabling
low back pain? JAMA. 2010;303:1295.
25. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Ofﬁce of Disease
Prevention and Health Promotion. Healthy People 2020. Arthritis,
osteoporosis, and chronic back conditions. Washington, D.C. Available
at: http://www.healthypeople.gov/202020202020/topics objectives/topic/Arthritis-Osteoporosis-and-Chronic-Back-Conditions.
Accessed June 19, 2015.
26. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Ofﬁce of Disease
Prevention and Health Promotion. Healthy People 2020. Physical
activity objectives. Washington, DC. Available at: http://www.
healthypeople.gov/2020202020202020/topics-objectives/topic/
physical-activity/objectives. Accessed June 19, 2015.
27. Davis MA, Onega T, Weeks WB, et al. Where the United States
spends its spine dollars: expenditures on different ambulatory services for the management of back and neck conditions. Spine.
2012;37:1693.
28. Balague F, Mannion AF, Pellise F, et al. Non-speciﬁc low back pain.
Lancet. 2012;379:482.
29. National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey. Factsheet. Outpatient
Department. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National
Center for Health Statistics. 2011. Available at: http://www.cdc.
gov/nchs/data/ahcd/NHAMCS_2011_opd_factsheet.pdf. Accessed
June 19, 2015.
30. Dagenais S, Tricco AC, Haldeman S. Synthesis of recommendations for the assessment and management of low back pain from
recent clinical practice guidelines. Spine J. 2010;10:514.
31. Waddell G, McCulloch JA, Kummel E, et al. Nonorganic physical
signs in low-back pain. Spine. 1980;5:117.
32. Chou R. Pharmacological management of low back pain. Drugs.
2010;70:387.
33. Looker AC, Borrud LG, Dawson-Hughes B, et al. Osteoporosis or
low bone mass at the femur neck or lumbar spine in older adults:
United States, 2005 2008. NCHS Data Brief. 2012;93:1.
34. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for osteoporosis:
U.S. preventive services task force recommendation statement.
Ann Intern Med. 2011;154:356.
35. Brauer CA, Coca-Perraillon M, Cutler DM, et al. Incidence and
mortality of hip fractures in the United States. JAMA. 2009;302:
1573.
36. Looker AC, Melton LJ 3rd, Harris TB, et al. Prevalence and trends
in low femur bone density among older US adults: NHANES 2005–
2006 compared with NHANES III. J Bone Miner Res. 2010;25:64.
37. Qaseem A, Snow V, Shekelle P, et al. Screening for osteoporosis in
men: a clinical practice guideline from the American College of
Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2008;148:680.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
REFERENCES
38. National Institutes of Health. Ofﬁce of Dietary Supplements. Calcium. Dietary Supplement Fact Sheet. 2013. Available at: http://
ods.od.nih.gov/factsheets/Calcium HealthProfessional./ Accessed
June 19, 2015.
39. Ross AC, Manson JE, Abrams SA, et al. The 2011 report on dietary
reference intakes for calcium and vitamin D from the Institute of
Medicine: what clinicians need to know. J Clin Endocrinol Metab.
2011;96:53.
40. LeFevre ML, U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for
vitamin D deﬁciency in adults: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2015;162:133.
41. Moyer VA, U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Vitamin D and
calcium supplementation to prevent fractures in adults: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern
Med. 2013;158:691.
42. Reid IR, Bristow SM, Bolland MJ. Cardiovascular complications of
calcium supplements. J Cell Biochem. 2015;116:494.
43. Heaney RP, Kopecky S, Maki KC, et al. A review of calcium supplements and cardiovascular disease risk. Adv Nutr. 2012;3:763.
44. Islam MR, Ahmed MU, Mitu SA, et al. Comparative analysis of
serum zinc, copper, manganese, iron, calcium, and magnesium level
and complexity of interelement relations in generalized anxiety
disorder patients. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2013;154:21.
45. Tripkovic L, Lambert H, Hart K, et al. Comparison of vitamin D2
and vitamin D3 supplementation in raising serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D status: a systematic review and meta analysis. Am J Clin
Nutr. 2012;95:1357.
46. Nelson HD, Haney EM, Dana T, et al. Screening for osteoporosis:
an update for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern
Med. 2010;153:99.
47. North American Menopause Society. Management of osteoporosis
in postmenopausal women: 2010 position statement of Menopause Society. Menopause. 2010;17:25.
48. Hodsman A, Papaioannou A, Ann C. Clinical practice guidelines
for the use of parathyroid hormone in the treatment of osteoporosis.
CMAJ. 2006;175:48.
49. Michael YL, Lin JS, Whitlock EP, et al. Interventions to prevent falls
in older adults: An updated systematic review. Rockville, MD; 2010.
Available at: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21595101.
21595101.21595101.21595101. Accessed June 19, 2015.
50. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Hip Fractures Among
Older Adults. Atlanta, GA; 2015. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/
HomeandRecreationalSafety/Falls/adulthipfx.html. Accessed June
19, 2015.
51. Moyer VA. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Prevention of falls
in community dwelling older adults: U.S. Preventive Services
Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2012;157:
197.
52. Singh JA, Furst DE, Bharat A, et al. 2012 update of the 2008 American College of Rheumatology recommendations for the use of
disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs and biologic agents in the
treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken).
2012;64:625.
53. Aletaha D, Neogi T, Silman AJ, et al. 2010 Rheumatoid arthritis
classiﬁcation criteria: an American College of Rheumatology/European League Against Rheumatism collaborative initiative. Arthritis
Rheum. 2010;62:2569.
54. Nagy G, van Vollenhoven RF. Sustained biologic-free and drug-free
remission in rheumatoid arthritis, where are we now? Arthritis Res
Ther. 2015;17:181.

55. Durham J, Newton-John TR, Zakrzewska JM. Temporomandibular
disorders. BMJ. 2015;350:h1154.
56. Schiffman E, Ohrbach R, Truelove E, et al. Diagnostic Criteria for
Temporomandibular Disorders (DC/TMD) for clinical and research
applications: recommendations of the International RDC/TMD
Consortium Network and Orofacial Pain Special Interest Group.
J Oral Facial Pain Headache. 2014;28:6.
57. McGee S. Chapter 55, Examination of the musculoskeletal system—the shoulder. In: Evidence-based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed.
St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2012.
58. Whittle S, Buchbinder R. In the clinic. Rotator cuff disease. Ann
Intern Med. 2015;162:ITC1–1.
59. Hermans J, Luime JJ, Meuffels DE, et al. Does this patient with
shoulder pain have rotator cuff disease?: The Rational Clinical
Examination systematic review. JAMA. 2013;310:837.
60. Hanchard NC, Lenza M, Handoll HH, et al. Physical tests for
shoulder impingements and local lesions of bursa, tendon or
labrum that may accompany impingement. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2013;4:CD007427.
61. Murrell GA, Walton. Diagnosis of rotator cuff tears. Lancet. 2001;
357:769.
62. Appleboam A, Reuben AD, Benger JR, et al. Elbow extension test
to rule out elbow fracture: multicentre prospective validation and
observational study of diagnostic accuracy in adults and children.
BMJ. 2008;337:2428.
63. Darracq MA, Vinson DR, Panacek EA. Preservation of active range
of motion after acute elbow trauma predicts absence of elbow fracture. Am J Emerg Med. 2008;26:779.
64. Arundel D, Williams P, Townend W. Deriving the East Riding
Elbow Rule (ER2): a maximally sensitive decision tool for elbow
injury. Emerg Med J. 2014;31:380.
65. Kleopa KA. In the clinic. Carpal tunnel syndrome. Ann Intern Med.
2015;163:ITC1–1.
66. Kenney RJ, Hammert WC. Physical examination of the hand. J Hand
Surg Am. 2014;39:2324.
67. Sauvé PS, Rhee PC, Shin AY, et al. Examination of the wrist: radialsided wrist pain. J Hand Surg Am. 2014;39:2089.
68. McGee S. Chapter 62, Disorders of the nerve roots, plexuses. In: Evidence-based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. St. Louis, MO: Saunders; 2012.
69. D’Arcy CA, McGee S. Does this patient have carpal tunnel syndrome? The rational clinical examination. JAMA. 2000;283:3110.
70. Raychaudhuri SP, Deodhar A. The classiﬁcation and diagnostic criteria of ankylosing spondylitis. J Autoimmun. 2014;48:128.
71. Al Nezari NH, Schneiders AG, Hendrick PA. Neurological examination of the peripheral nervous system to diagnose lumbar spinal
disc herniation with suspected radiculopathy: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Spine J. 2013;13:657.
72. Scaia V, Baxter D, Cook C. The pain provocation-based straight leg
raise test for diagnosis of lumbar disc herniation, lumbar radiculopathy, and/or sciatica: a systematic review of clinical utility. J Back
Musculoskelet Rehabil. 2012;25:215.
73. Iversen T, Solberg TK, Romner B, et al. Accuracy of physical examination for chronic lumbar radiculopathy. BMC Musculoskelet Disord.
2013;14:206.
74. Frank RM, Slabaugh MA, Grumet RC, et al. Hip pain in active
patients: what you may be missing. J Fam Pract. 2012;61:736.
75. Suarez JC, Ely EE, Mutnal AB, et al. Comprehensive approach to
the evaluation of groin pain. J Am Acad Orthop Surg. 2013;21:558.
76. Karrasch C, Lynch S. Practical approach to hip pain. Med Clin N
Am. 2014:98:737.

C H A P T E R 16

| The Musculoskeletal System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

709

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
REFERENCES
77. Reiman MP, Goode AP, Hegedus EJ, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of
clinical tests of the hip: A systematic review with meta-analysis.
Br J Sports Med. 2012;47:893.
78. Prather H, Harris-Hayes M, Hunt DM, et al. Reliability and agreement of hip range of motion and provocative physical examination
tests in asymptomatic volunteers. PM R. 2010;2:888.
79. Smith BE, Thacker D, Crewesmith A, et al. Special tests for assessing meniscal tears within the knee: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Evid Based Med. 2015;20:88.
80. Lester JD, Watson JN, Hutchinson MR. Physical examination of the
patellofemoral joint. Clin Sports Med. 2014;33:403.
81. Morelli V, Braxton TM Jr. Meniscal, plica, patellar, and patellofemoral injuries of the knee: updates, controversies and advancements. Prim Care. 2013;40:357.
82. Schiphof D, van Middelkoop M, de Klerk BM, et al. Crepitus is a
ﬁrst indication of patellofemoral osteoarthritis (and not of tibiofemoral osteoarthritis). Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2014;22:631.
83. Knutson T, Bothwell J, Durbin R. Evaluation and management of
traumatic knee injuries in the emergency department. Emerg Clin
North Am. 2015;33:345.
84. Karrasch C, Gallo RA. The acutely injured knee. Med Clin North
Am. 2014;98:719.

710

85. Young C. In the clinic. Plantar fasciitis. Ann Intern Med. 2012;
156:ITC1–1.
86. Papaliodis DN, Vanushkina MA, Richardson NG, et al. The foot
and ankle examination. Med Clin North Am. 2014;98:181.
87. Czajka CM, Tran E, Cai AN. Ankle sprains and instability. Med Clin
North Am. 2014;98:313.
88. Tiemstra JD. Update on acute ankle sprains. Am Fam Phys. 2012;
85:1170.
89. Clauw DJ. Fibromyalgia: a clinical review. JAMA. 2014;311:1547.
90. Golub AL, Laya MB. Osteoporosis: screening, prevention, and
management. Med Clin N Am. 2015;99:587.
91. Neogi T. Gout. New Engl J Med. 2011;364;443.
92. Kreiner DS, Shaffer WO, Baisden JL, et al. An evidence-based clinical guideline for the diagnosis and treatment of degenerative lumbar spinal stenosis (update). Spine J. 2013;13:734.
93. Suri P, Rainville J, Kalichman L, et al. Does this older adult with
lower extremity pain have the clinical syndrome of lumbar spinal
stenosis? JAMA. 2010;304:2628.
94. Assassi S, Weisman MH, Lee M, et al. New population-based reference values for spinal mobility measures based on the 2009–2010
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Arthritis Rheumatol. 2014;66:2628.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

