http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

C H A P T E R

17

The Nervous System
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (Vols. 17 and 18: Nervous System)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com

The focus of this chapter is the evaluation of the cranial nerves (CNs), the motor
system with all its components, the sensory system, and the reﬂexes. The complex
anatomy and physiology of the nervous system make examination and assessment
especially challenging, but attainable with practice and dedication. For many of
the body systems, the history provides the essential clues to diagnosis. While this
is true for the nervous system, the neurologic examination allows you to assess all
levels of nervous system function to a degree that is unique.
Because the nervous system affects all body systems, knowledge of neural function plays a role in the evaluation of any illness. Begin by reviewing the key
structures of the brain illustrated in Figure 17-1.
The history and neurologic examination seek to answer four guiding questions.1
These questions are not answered separately, but iteratively as you learn about the
patient from the patient’s spontaneous responses during the interview and from
Frontal lobe

Parietal lobe

Occipital lobe
Diencephalon

Pituitary gland
Midbrain
Brainstem

Cerebellum

Pons
Medulla

FIGURE 17-1.

Right half of the brain, medial view.

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

711

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
THE CHALLENGES OF NEUROLOGIC DIAGNOSIS

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

your neurologic ﬁndings. As you acquire the skills of nervous system examination, it is important to test your ﬁndings against those of your teachers and
neurologists to reﬁne your clinical expertise.
Guiding Questions for Examination of the
Nervous System
Does the patient have neurologic disease?
If so, what is the localization of the lesion or lesions? Are your ﬁndings symmetric?
● What is the pathophysiology of abnormal ﬁndings?
● What is the preliminary diﬀerential diagnosis?
●
●

Assessment of the nervous system begins with the ﬁrst moments of the patient
encounter and continues throughout the interview. If you suspect that the
patient’s mental status is abnormal, proceed directly to formal mental status testing, described in Chapter 5. If there is signiﬁcant impairment, for example, disorientation to person or place, the history may be unreliable, so you will need
other observers to obtain critical information.

See Chapter 5, Behavior and Mental
Status, pp. 147–171, techniques to
conduct the formal mental status
examination.

The Challenges of
Neurologic Diagnosis
Neurologic diagnosis is considered difﬁcult by many. Lesions at different levels
of the nervous system can cause the same physical ﬁnding. For example, weakness of foot dorsiﬂexion can be caused by disease of the brain, brainstem, spinal
cord, spinal nerve root, peripheral nerve, and muscles. In addition, neurologic
pathophysiology can have positive or negative effects, or both. Loss of sensory
or motor function may be transient or permanent. Alternatively, some nervous
system structures have inhibitory effects. When destroyed, there may be increased
function such as heightened muscle tone or pathologic hyperreﬂexia from upper
corticospinal tract lesions. There may be irritative phenomena such as the pinsand-needles sensation of paresthesias, myoclonus, or focal seizures with jerking
of a limb on one side of the body. In addition, some parts of the nervous system
are relatively silent—extensive lesions can even be present without causing
symptoms or abnormal ﬁndings.
In many neurologic conditions the neurologic examination may be normal, as
when a patient recovers from attacks of epilepsy or a transient ischemic attack
(TIA). In some neurologic diseases such as migraine, normal ﬁndings are
expected—abnormal ﬁndings would trigger alarm and further evaluation. In some
instances, symptoms in the absence of ﬁndings would raise concern, as with a TIA.
When you conduct the neurologic examination, it is wise to adopt a ﬁxed routine or examination sequence to minimize omission of one of its important
components. Pursue more detailed testing of areas targeted by symptoms and
712

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
abnormal function. Follow-up examination over time is important for determining whether the patient’s condition is getting worse, improving spontaneously,
or responding to treatment. The goal of your assessment is not just diagnosis, but
treating and restoring the patient to health and the full range of activities of daily
living.2

Anatomy and Physiology
Central Nervous System
The Brain. The brain has four regions: the cerebrum, the diencephalon, the
brainstem, and the cerebellum. Each cerebral hemisphere is subdivided into
frontal, parietal, temporal, and occipital lobes.

The central nervous system (CNS) of the brain is a vast network of interconnecting
nerve cells, or neurons, consisting of cell bodies and their axons—single long
ﬁbers that conduct impulses to other parts of the nervous system.
Brain tissue may be gray or white. Gray matter consists of aggregations of neuronal cell bodies. It rims the surfaces of the cerebral hemispheres, forming the
cerebral cortex. White matter consists of neuronal axons that are coated with
myelin. The myelin sheaths, which create the white color, allow nerve impulses
to travel more rapidly.
Deep in the brain lie additional clusters of gray matter (Fig. 17-2). These include
the basal ganglia, which affect movement, and the thalamus and the hypothalamus structures in the diencephalon. The thalamus processes sensory impulses
and relays them to the cerebral cortex. The hypothalamus maintains homeostasis

Gray matter

Corpus callosum

White matter
Caudate nucleus

Internal
capsule
Basal
ganglia
Thalamus
Optic tracts

FIGURE 17-2.

Brain anatomy—coronal section.

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

713

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
and regulates temperature, heart rate, and blood pressure. The hypothalamus
affects the endocrine system and governs emotional behaviors such as anger and
sexual drive. Hormones secreted in the hypothalamus act directly on the pituitary gland.
The internal capsule is a white-matter structure where myelinated ﬁbers converge
from all parts of the cerebral cortex and descend into the brainstem. The brainstem,
which connects the upper part of the brain with the spinal cord, has three sections: the midbrain, the pons, and the medulla.
Consciousness relies on the interaction between intact cerebral hemispheres and
a structure in the diencephalon and upper brainstem, the reticular activating
(arousal) system.
The cerebellum, which lies at the base of the brain, coordinates all movement and
helps maintain the body upright in space.
The Spinal Cord. Below the medulla, the CNS extends into
the elongated spinal cord, encased within the bony vertebral column
and terminating at the ﬁrst or second lumbar vertebra. The cord
provides a series of segmental relays with the periphery, serving as a
conduit for information ﬂow to and from the brain. The motor and
sensory nerve pathways relay neural signals that enter and exit the
cord through posterior and anterior nerve roots and the spinal and
peripheral nerves.

The spinal cord is divided into segments: cervical, from C1 to C8;
thoracic, from T1 to T12; lumbar, from L1 to L5; sacral, from S1 to
S5; and coccygeal (Fig. 17-3). The spinal cord is thickest in the
cervical segment, which contains nerve tracts to and from both the
upper and lower extremities.
Note that the spinal cord is not as long as the vertebral canal. The
lumbar and sacral roots travel the longest intraspinal distance and
fan out like a horse’s tail at L1–L2, giving rise to the term cauda
equina. To avoid injury to the spinal cord, most lumbar punctures
are performed at the L3–L4 or L4–L5 vertebral interspaces.3,4

C2 nerve root

C8 nerve root
T1 nerve root

C2 cord segment

C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7
T1
T2
T3

T1 cord segment
Spinous process T1

T4
T5
T6
T7
T8

Anterior

Posterior

T9
T10
T11
L1 cord segment

T12
L1 nerve root

L1
Spinous process L1
L2

Peripheral Nervous System
The peripheral nervous system (PNS) consists of both CNs and peripheral nerves that project to the heart, visceral organs, skin, and limbs.
It controls the somatic nervous system, which regulates muscle movements and response to the sensations of touch and pain, and the
autonomic nervous system that connects to internal organs and generates autonomic reﬂex responses. The autonomic nervous system
consists of the sympathetic nervous system, which “mobilizes organs
and their functions during times of stress and arousal, and the parasympathetic nervous system, which conserves energy and resources
during times of rest and relaxation.”5
714

L3
L4

Cauda equina

L5
S1
S1 nerve root

S2
S3
S4
S5

FIGURE 17-3.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Spinal cord, lateral view.

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The Cranial Nerves. Twelve pairs of special nerves called cranial nerves
(CNs) emerge from the cranial vault through skull foramina and canals to
structures in the head and neck. They are numbered sequentially with Roman
numerals in rostral to caudal order as they arise from the brain. CNs III through
XII arise from the diencephalon and the brainstem, as illustrated in Figure 17-4.
CNs I and II are actually ﬁber tracts emerging from the brain. Some CNs are
limited to general motor and/or sensory functions, whereas others are specialized,
serving smell, vision, or hearing (I, II, VIII).

Functions of the CNs most relevant to the physical examination are summarized
on the next page.

Pituitary gland
DIENCEPHALON

CN I olfactory

CN II optic nerve
CN II optic tract

MIDBRAIN
CN III oculomotor

PONS

CN IV trochlear

CN V
trigeminal
MEDULLA
CN IX
glossopharyngeal

CN VI abducens
CN VII facial
CN VIII
acoustic

CN X
vagus
Cerebellum

CN XI
spinal
accessory
CN XII
hypoglossal

FIGURE 17-4.

Brain anatomy—inferior surface.

The Peripheral Nerves. The PNS includes spinal and peripheral nerves
that carry impulses to and from the cord. A total of 31 pairs of spinal nerves
attach to the spinal cord: 8 cervical, 12 thoracic, 5 lumbar, 5 sacral, and
1 coccygeal. Each nerve has an anterior (ventral) root containing motor ﬁbers,
and a posterior (dorsal) root containing sensory ﬁbers. The anterior and posterior
roots merge to form a short spinal nerve, <5 mm long. Spinal nerve ﬁbers
commingle with similar ﬁbers from other levels in plexuses outside the cord,
from which peripheral nerves emerge. Most peripheral nerves contain both sensory
(afferent) and motor (efferent) ﬁbers.
C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

715

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

Cranial Nerves
No.

Name

Function

I
II

Olfactory
Optic

Sense of smell
Vision
III

III

VI

III
III

III
IV
V

Oculomotor
Trochlear
Trigeminal

IV

Pupillary constriction, opening the eye (lid elevation), and most extraocular movements
Downward, internal rotation of the eye
Motor—temporal and masseter muscles (jaw clenching), lateral pterygoids (lateral jaw movement)
Temporal muscle

Masseter muscle

Sensory—facial. The nerve has three divisions: (1) ophthalmic, (2) maxillary, and (3) mandibular.

(1)

C2

(2)
(3)

VI
VII

Abducens
Facial

VIII
IX

Acoustic
Glossopharyngeal

X

Vagus

XI

Spinal accessory

Lateral deviation of the eye
Motor—facial movements, including those of facial expression, closing the eye, and closing the mouth
Sensory—taste for salty, sweet, sour, and bitter substances on the anterior two thirds of the tongue and
sensation from the ear
Hearing (cochlear division) and balance—(vestibular division)
Motor—pharynx
Sensory—posterior portions of the eardrum and ear canal, the pharynx, and the posterior tongue, including
taste (salty, sweet, sour, bitter)
Motor—palate, pharynx, and larynx
Sensory—pharynx and larynx
Motor—the sternocleidomastoid and upper portion of the trapezius

Sternocleidomastoid
muscle
Trapezius
muscle

XII

716

Hypoglossal

Motor—tongue

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Like the brain, the spinal cord contains both gray matter and white matter
(Fig. 17-5). The gray matter consists of aggregations of nerve cell nuclei and
dendrites that are surrounded by white tracts of nerve ﬁbers connecting the brain
to the PNS. Note the butterﬂy appearance of the gray matter nuclei and their
anterior and posterior horns.
Posterior horn
Posterior root

Posterior root
ganglion
Afferent
sensory
fiber

Efferent
motor fiber
Anterior
horn

Anterior
horn cell

FIGURE 17-5.

Anterior root
Muscle

Spinal cord, cross section.

Motor Pathways
Motor pathways are complex avenues that extend from upper motor neurons
through long white matter tracts to synapses with lower motor neurons, and continue to the periphery through peripheral nerve structures. Upper motor neurons, or nerve cell bodies, lie in the motor strip of the cerebral cortex and in
several brainstem nuclei; their axons synapse with motor nuclei in the brainstem
(for CNs) and in the spinal cord (for peripheral nerves). Lower motor neurons
have cell bodies in the spinal cord, termed anterior horn cells; their axons transmit impulses through the anterior roots and spinal nerves into peripheral nerves,
terminating at the neuromuscular junction.
Three kinds of motor pathways impinge on the anterior horn cells: the corticospinal tract, the basal ganglia system, and the cerebellar system. Additional pathways originating in the brainstem mediate ﬂexor and extensor tone in limb
movement and posture, most notably in coma (see Table 17-14, p. 793).
The Principal Motor Pathways
●

The corticospinal (pyramidal) tract. The corticospinal tracts mediate voluntary
movement and integrate skilled, complicated, or delicate movements by stimulating selected muscular actions and inhibiting others. They also carry
impulses that inhibit muscle tone, the slight tension maintained by normal
muscle even when it is relaxed. The corticospinal tracts originate in the motor
cortex of the brain (Fig. 17-6). Motor ﬁbers travel down into the lower
medulla, where they form an anatomical structure resembling a pyramid.
(continued )

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

717

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

The Principal Motor Pathways (continued )
There, most of these ﬁbers cross to the opposite or contralateral side of the
medulla, continue downward, and synapse with anterior horn cells or with
intermediate neurons. Tracts synapsing in the brainstem with motor nuclei
of the CNs are termed corticobulbar.
● The basal ganglia system. This exceedingly complex system includes motor
pathways between the cerebral cortex, basal ganglia, brainstem, and spinal
cord. It helps to maintain muscle tone and to control body movements, especially gross automatic movements such as walking.
● The cerebellar system. The cerebellum receives both sensory and motor input and
coordinates motor activity, maintains equilibrium, and helps to control posture.

All of these higher motor pathways affect
movement only through the lower motor
neuron systems, sometimes called the
“ﬁnal common pathway.” Any movement, whether initiated voluntarily in the
cortex, “automatically” in the basal ganglia, or reﬂexly via the sensory receptors,
must ultimately be translated into action
by the anterior horn cells. A lesion in any
of these areas will affect movement or
reﬂex activity.
When the corticospinal tract is damaged
or destroyed, its functions are reduced or
lost below the level of injury. When
upper motor neuron systems are damaged above their crossover in the
medulla, motor impairment develops on
the opposite or contralateral side. In
damage below the crossover, motor
impairment occurs on the same or ipsilateral side of the body. The affected limb
becomes weak or paralyzed, and skilled,
complicated, or delicate movements are
performed poorly when compared with
gross movements.
In upper motor neuron lesions, muscle
tone is increased and deep tendon
reﬂexes are exaggerated. Damage to the
lower motor neuron systems causes ipsilateral weakness and paralysis, but in
this case, muscle tone and reﬂexes are
decreased or absent.

Knee
Hip
Trunk
Hand
Thalamus

Face

Tongue

Basal
ganglia

Internal
capsule

MIDBRAIN

Corticobulbar tract

LOWER MEDULLA

Pyramids

SPINAL CORD
Lateral corticospinal
tract
Anterior corticospinal
tract

FIGURE 17-6.

718

Corticospinal tracts

Motor pathways: corticospinal and corticobulbar tracts.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Disease of the basal ganglia system or cerebellar system does not cause paralysis,
but can be disabling. Damage to the basal ganglia system produces changes in
muscle tone (most often an increase), disturbances in posture and gait, a slowness or lack of spontaneous and automatic movements termed bradykinesia, and
various involuntary movements. Cerebellar damage impairs coordination, gait,
and equilibrium, and decreases muscle tone.

Sensory Pathways
Sensory impulses participate not only in
reﬂex activity, as previously described, but
also give rise to conscious sensation, locate
body position in space, and help regulate
internal autonomic functions such as blood
pressure, heart rate, and respiration.
A complex system of sensory receptors relays
impulses from skin, mucous membranes,
muscles, tendons, and viscera that travel
through peripheral projections into the posterior root ganglia, where a second projection of the ganglia directs impulses centrally
into the spinal cord (Fig. 17-7). Sensory
impulses then travel to the sensory cortex of
the brain via one of two pathways: the spinothalamic tract, consisting of smaller sensory
neurons with unmyelinated or thinly myelinated axons, and the posterior columns, which
have larger neurons with heavily myelinated
axons.6
The peripheral component of the smallﬁber spinothalamic tract arises in free nerve
endings in the skin that register pain, temperature, and crude touch. Within one or two
spinal segments from their entry into the
cord, these ﬁbers pass into the posterior
horn and synapse with secondary neurons.
The secondary neurons then cross to the
opposite side and pass upward into the
thalamus.

Thigh area
Trunk
area
PARIETAL LOBE
Arm area
Face
area
THALAMUS

LOWER MEDULLA
Spinothalamic tract:
Pain and temperature
Crude touch

Posterior column:
Position and vibration
Fine touch

SPINAL CORD T5

Posterior root
Posterior root
ganglion
SPINAL CORD L4

FIGURE 17-7.
posterior columns.

Sensory pathways: spinothalamic tract and

In the posterior column system, the peripheral large-ﬁber projections of the dorsal root
ganglia transmit the sensations of vibration, proprioception, kinesthesia, pressure, and
ﬁne touch from skin and joint position receptors to the dorsal root ganglia, where they
travel through central projections in the posterior columns to second-order sensory
neurons in the medulla. Fibers projecting from the secondary neurons cross to the
opposite side at the medullary level and continue on to the thalamus.

Diabetic patients with small-fiber
neuropathy report sharp, burning, or
shooting foot pain, whereas those
with large-fiber neuropathy experience numbness and tingling or even
no sensation at all.7,8

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

719

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

At the thalamic level, the general quality of sensation is perceived (e.g., pain, cold,
pleasant, unpleasant), but not ﬁne distinctions. For full perception, a third group
of sensory neurons sends impulses from the thalamus to the sensory cortex of the
brain. Here, stimuli are localized and higher-order discriminations are made.
Lesions at different points in the sensory pathways produce different kinds of
sensory loss. Patterns of sensory loss, together with their associated motor ﬁndings, help you locate the causative lesions. A lesion in the sensory cortex may not
impair the perception of pain, touch, and position, for example, but does impair
ﬁner discrimination. A patient with this lesion cannot appreciate the size, shape,
or texture of an object by feeling it and therefore cannot identify it. Loss of position and vibration sense, with preservation of other sensations, points to disease
of the posterior columns, whereas loss of all sensations from the waist down,
together with paralysis and hyperactive reﬂexes in the legs, indicates severe
transverse damage to the spinal cord. Crude and light touch are often preserved
despite partial damage to the cord because impulses originating on one side of
the body travel up both sides of the cord.

See Table 17-1, Disorders of the Central and Peripheral Nervous Systems,
pp. 774–775.

Dermatomes. A dermatome is the band of skin innervated by the sensory
root of a single spinal nerve. Knowledge and testing of dermatomes are valuable
when localizing a lesion to a speciﬁc spinal cord segment.

See the dermatome “maps” on pp. 756
and 757.

Spinal Reﬂexes: The Muscle
Stretch Response
The muscle stretch reﬂexes are relayed over structures of both the CNS and PNS.
Since the tendons are not the primary structures involved, the term muscle stretch
reﬂexes is more precise than the commonly used deep tendon reﬂexes. Recall that
a reﬂex is an involuntary stereotypical response that may involve as few as two
neurons, one afferent (sensory) and one efferent (motor), across a single synapse.
The muscle stretch reﬂexes in the arms and legs are such monosynaptic reﬂexes.
They illustrate the simplest unit of sensory and motor function. Other reﬂexes
are polysynaptic, involving interneurons interposed between sensory and motor
neurons.
To elicit a muscle stretch reﬂex, briskly tap the tendon of a partially stretched
muscle. For the reﬂex to occur, all components of the reﬂex arc must be intact:
sensory nerve ﬁbers, spinal cord synapse, motor nerve ﬁbers, neuromuscular
junction, and muscle ﬁbers. Tapping the tendon activates special sensory ﬁbers
in the partially stretched muscle, triggering a sensory impulse that travels to the
spinal cord via a peripheral nerve. The stimulated sensory ﬁber synapses directly
with the anterior horn cell innervating the same muscle. When the impulse
crosses the neuromuscular junction, the muscle suddenly contracts, completing
the reﬂex arc.
Because each muscle stretch reﬂex involves speciﬁc spinal segments, together
with their sensory and motor ﬁbers, an abnormal reﬂex helps you locate a pathologic lesion. Learn the segmental levels of the muscle stretch reﬂexes. You can
remember them easily by their numerical sequence in ascending order from
ankle to triceps: S1, L2–L4, C5–C6, C6–C7.
720

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY

Muscle Stretch Reﬂexes
Ankle reﬂex
Knee reﬂex
Supinator (brachioradialis) reﬂex
Biceps reﬂex
Triceps reﬂex

Sacral 1 primarily
Lumbar 2, 3, 4
Cervical 5, 6
Cervical 5, 6
Cervical 6, 7

Reﬂexes may be initiated by stimulating skin as well as muscle. Stroking the skin of
the abdomen, for example, produces a localized muscular twitch. Superﬁcial (cutaneous) reﬂexes and their corresponding spinal segments include the following:
Cutaneous Stimulation Reﬂexes
Abdominal reﬂexes—upper
—lower
Cremasteric reﬂex
Plantar responses
Anal reﬂex

Thoracic 8, 9, 10
Thoracic 10, 11, 12
Lumbar 1, 2
Lumbar 5, sacral 1
Sacral 2, 3, 4

The Health History
Common or Concerning Symptoms
Headache
Dizziness or vertigo
● Weakness (generalized, proximal, or distal)
● Numbness, abnormal or absent sensation
● Fainting and blacking out (near-syncope and syncope)
● Seizures
● Tremors or involuntary movements
●
●

Two of the most common symptoms in neurologic disorders are headache and
dizziness. Review the discussions of these symptoms in Chapter 7, Head and
Neck, pp. 215–302.
Headache. Headaches have many causes, ranging from benign to life
threatening, and always warrant thorough assessment. Neurologic causes such
as subarachnoid hemorrhage, meningitis, or mass lesions are especially ominous.
The careful clinician pays close attention to the history and a detailed neurologic
examination.

See Table 7-1, Primary Headaches,
p. 267, and Table 7-2, Secondary
Headaches, pp. 268–269.
Primary headaches include migraine,
tension, cluster, and trigeminal
autonomic cephalagias; secondary
headaches arise from underlying
structural, systemic, or infectious
causes and may be life threatening.9

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

721

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
THE HEALTH HISTORY

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Always assess the severity of the headache and its location, duration, and any
associated symptoms such as double vision, visual changes, weakness, or loss of
sensation. Does the headache get worse with coughing, sneezing, or sudden
head movements, which can alter intracranial pressure dynamics? Is there fever,
stiff neck, or a parameningeal focus like ear, sinus, or throat infection that may
signal meningitis?10

Subarachnoid hemorrhage classically
presents as “the worst headache of my
life” with instantaneous onset.11–13
Severe headache and stiff neck accompany meningitis.14–16 Dull headache
increased by coughing and sneezing,
especially when recurring in the same
location, occurs in mass lesions from
brain tumors or abscess.17,18

An atypical presentation of the patient’s usual migraine may be suspicious for
stroke, especially in women using hormonal contraceptives.19–22

Migraine headache is often preceded by
an aura or prodrome, and is highly likely
if three of the five “POUND” features are
present: Pulsatile or throbbing; Oneday duration, or lasts 4 to 72 hours if
untreated; Unilateral; Nausea or vomiting; Disabling or intensity causing interruption of daily activity.22,23

Always look for unusual headache warning signs, such as sudden onset “like a
thunderclap,” onset after age 50 years, and associated symptoms such as fever
and stiff neck. Examine for papilledema and focal neurologic signs.10

See box “Headache Warning Signs” on
p. 216 in Chapter 7.

Dizziness or Vertigo. As you learned in Chapter 7, Head and Neck,
dizziness and light-headedness are common, somewhat vague, complaints that
prompt a more speciﬁc history and neurologic examination, with emphasis on
detection of nystagmus and focal neurologic signs. Especially in older patients,
ask about medications.

Feeling light-headed, weak in the
legs, or about to faint points to presyncope from vasovagal stimulation,
orthostatic hypotension, arrhythmia,
or side effects from blood pressure
and other medications. See Table 17-3,
Syncope and Similar Disorders,
pp. 778–779.

Does the patient feel faint or about to fall or pass out (presyncope)? Or unsteady
and off balance (disequilibrium or ataxia)? Or is there true vertigo, a spinning sensation within the patient or of the surroundings? If there is true vertigo, establish
the time course of symptoms, which helps distinguish among the different types
of peripheral vestibular disorders.

Vertigo often reflects vestibular disease, usually from peripheral causes
in the inner ear such as benign positional vertigo, labyrinthitis, or Ménière
disease.24
See Table 7-4, Dizziness and Vertigo,
p. 271, for distinguishing symptoms
and time course.

If there are localizing symptoms or signs like double vision (diplopia), difﬁculty
forming words (dysarthria), or problems with gait or balance (ataxia), investigate
the central causes of vertigo.

Ataxia, diplopia, and dysarthria are
suspicious for vertebrobasilar TIA or
stroke.25–30 Also consider posterior
fossa tumor and migraine with
brainstem aura.
See Table 17-2, Types of Stroke,
pp. 776–777.

722

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY
Weakness. Weakness is another common symptom with many causes
which bears careful investigation. It is important to clarify what the patient
means—fatigue, apathy, drowsiness, or actual loss of strength. True motor
weakness can arise from the CNS, a peripheral nerve, the neuromuscular
junction, or a muscle. Time course and location are especially relevant. Is the
onset sudden, gradual or subacute, or chronic, over a long period of time?

Abrupt onset of motor and sensory
deficits occurs in TIA and stroke.25–30
Progressive subacute onset of lower
extremity weakness suggests
Guillain–Barré syndrome.31 Chronic,
more gradual, onset of lower
extremity weakness occurs in primary
and metastatic spinal cord tumors.

What areas of the body are involved? Is the weakness generalized, or focal to
the face or a limb? Does it involve one side of the body or both sides? What
movements are affected? As you listen to the patient’s story, identify the patterns
below:

Focal or asymmetric weakness has both
central (ischemic, thrombotic, or mass
lesions) and peripheral causes ranging
from nerve injury to the neuromuscular
junction disorders to myopathies.

■ Proximal—in the shoulder and/or hip girdle, for example
■ Distal—in the hands and/or feet
■ Symmetric—in the same areas on both sides of the body
■ Asymmetric—types of weakness include focal, in a portion of the face or

extremity; monoparesis, in an extremity; paraparesis, in both lower extremities; and hemiparesis, in one side of the body

Proximal limb weakness, when symmetric with intact sensation, occurs in
myopathies from alcohol, drugs like
glucocorticoids, and inflammatory
muscle disorders like polymyositis and
dermatomyositis. In the neuromuscular
junction disorder myasthenia gravis,
there is proximal typically asymmetric
weakness that gets worse with effort
(fatigability), often with associated
bulbar symptoms such as diplopia,
ptosis, dysarthria, and dysphagia.32,33

To identify proximal weakness, ask about difﬁculty with movements such as
combing hair, reaching up to a shelf, getting up out of a chair, or climbing stairs.
Does the weakness get worse with repetition and improve after rest (suggesting
myasthenia gravis)? Are there associated sensory or other symptoms?
To identify distal weakness, ask about hand strength when opening a jar or using
scissors or a screwdriver, or problems tripping when walking.

Bilateral predominantly distal weakness, often with sensory loss, suggests a polyneuropathy, as in diabetes.

Numbness, Abnormal or Absent Sensation. In a patient who
reports numbness, ask the patient to be more precise. Is there tingling like “pins
and needles,” which are altered sensations called paresthesias, distorted sensations
(dysesthesias), or is sensation reduced or completely absent?

Sensory changes can arise at several
levels: local nerve compression or
“entrapment,” seen in hand numbness
in distributions specific to the median,
ulnar, or radial nerve; nerve root
compression with dermatomal
sensory loss from vertebral bone
spurs or herniated discs; or central
lesions from stroke or multiple
sclerosis.

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

723

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
THE HEALTH HISTORY

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

In dysesthesias, light touch or pinprick, for example, may cause a burning or
irritating sensation.

Burning pain occurs in painful sensory
neuropathies from conditions like
diabetes.34,35

Establish the pattern of sensory loss. Is there a stocking-glove distribution? Are
sensory deﬁcits patchy, nondermatomal, and occurring in more than one limb?

A pattern of stocking, then glove, sensory loss occurs in polyneuropathies,
especially from diabetes; multiple
patchy areas of sensory loss in different limbs suggest mononeuritis multiplex, seen in diabetes and rheumatoid
arthritis.

Fainting and Blacking Out (Near-Syncope and Syncope). Patient
reports of fainting or “passing out” are common and warrant a meticulous history
to guide management and possible hospital admission.36 Begin by ﬁnding out
whether the patient has actually lost consciousness. Did the patient hear
external noise or voices throughout the episode, feel light-headed or weak, but
fail to actually lose consciousness, consistent with near syncope or presyncope? Or
did the patient actually experience complete loss of consciousness, a more
serious symptom representing true syncope, deﬁned as a sudden but temporary
loss of consciousness and postural tone from transient global hypoperfusion of
the brain?

See Table 17-3, Syncope and Similar
Disorders, pp. 778–779.

Elicit a complete description of the event. What was the patient doing when the
episode occurred? Was the patient standing, sitting, or lying down? Were there
any triggers or warning symptoms? How long did the episode last? Could voices
still be heard? Importantly, were onset and offset slow or fast? Were there any
palpitations? Is there a history of heart disease, which has a sensitivity for a cardiac cause of more than 95% (with a speciﬁcity of ∼45%)?36

Causes include seizures, “neurocardiogenic” conditions such as vasovagal
syncope, postural tachycardia syndrome, carotid sinus syncope, and
orthostatic hypotension, and cardiac
disease causing arrhythmias, especially ventricular tachycardia and
bradyarrhythmias.37 Stroke or subarachnoid hemorrhage are unlikely
causes of syncope unless both hemispheres are affected.
In vasovagal syncope, the most common cause of syncope, look for the
prodrome of nausea, diaphoresis,
and pallor triggered by a fearful or
unpleasant event, then vagally mediated hypotension, often with slow
onset and offset. In syncope from
arrhythmias, onset and offset are
often sudden, reflecting loss and
recovery of cerebral perfusion.

Try to interview any witnesses. Consider the possibility of a seizure based on
the features described in the following section, especially if the onset was
abrupt and without warning.
Seizures. Patients may report “spells” or fainting that raises suspicion of
seizure, a sudden excessive electrical discharge from cortical neurons. Seizures
may be symptomatic, with an identiﬁable cause, or idiopathic. A careful history
is important to rule out other causes of loss of consciousness and acute
symptomatic seizures that have discernible explanations.

724

See Table 17-4, Seizure Disorders,
pp. 780–781.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY
If there is more than one seizure, consider epilepsy, deﬁned as two or more seizures that are not provoked by other illnesses or circumstances.38,39 The incidence of epilepsy in the United States is 3%; in more than 60% to 70% of affected
patients, no cause is identiﬁed.

Common causes of acute symptomatic
seizures include: head trauma; alcohol,
cocaine, and other drugs; withdrawal
from alcohol, benzodiazepines, and
barbiturates; metabolic insults from
low or high glucose or low calcium or
sodium; acute stroke; and meningitis
or encephalitis.40

Epilepsy does not always involve loss of consciousness, depending on the type.
It is usually classiﬁed as generalized or partial, based on the location in the cortex
of the initial seizure focus. If available, ask a witness how the patient looked
before, during, and after the episode. Was there any seizure-like movement of
the arms or legs? Any incontinence of the bladder or bowel? What about any
drowsiness or impaired memory after the event suggestive of a postictal state?

Tonic–clonic motor activity, bladder
or bowel incontinence, and postictal
state characterize generalized seizures. Unlike syncope, tongue biting
or bruising of limbs may occur.

Ask about age at onset, frequency, change in frequency or symptom pattern, and
use of medications, alcohol, or illicit drugs. Check for any history of head injury.

Generalized epilepsy syndromes usually begin in childhood or adolescence; adult-onset seizures are
usually partial.

Tremors or Invountary Movements. Tremor, “a rhythmic oscillatory
movement of a body part resulting from the contraction of opposing muscle
groups,” is the most common movement disorder.41,42 It may be an isolated ﬁnding
or part of a neurologic disorder. Ask about any tremor, shaking, or body movements
that the patient seems unable to control. Does the tremor occur at rest? Does it get
worse with voluntary intentional movement or with sustained postures?

See Table 17-5, Tremors and Involuntary Movements, pp. 782–783.

Distinct from these symptoms is restless legs syndrome, present in 6% to 12% of
the U.S. population, described as an unpleasant sensation in the legs, especially
at night, that gets worse with rest and improves with movement of the symptomatic limb(s).45,46

Reversible causes of restless legs
syndrome include pregnancy, renal
disease, and iron deficiency.

Epilepsy is more common in infants and
older adults. The baseline neurologic
examination is frequently normal.

Low-frequency unilateral resting
tremor, rigidity, and bradykinesia typify Parkinson disease.43,44 Essential
tremors are high-frequency, bilateral,
upper extremity tremors that occur
with both limb movement and sustained posture and subside when the
limb is relaxed; head, voice, and leg
tremor may also be present.42

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

725

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Health Promotion and
Counseling: Evidence and
Recommendations
Important Topics for Health Promotion
and Counseling
Preventing stroke and transient ischemic attack
Carotid artery screening
● Reducing risk of peripheral neuropathy
● Herpes zoster vaccination
● Detecting the “three D’s”: delirium, dementia, and depression
●
●

Preventing Stroke and Transient Ischemic Attack. Stroke is a
sudden neurologic deﬁcit caused by cerebrovascular ischemia (87%) or
hemorrhage (13%). Hemorrhagic strokes may be intracerebral (10% of all strokes)
or subarachnoid (3% of all strokes). Stroke is the fourth leading cause of death
in the United States and a leading cause of long-term disability.47

See Table 17-2, Types of Stroke,
pp. 776–777.

The American Heart Association (AHA) and the American Stroke Association
(ASA) have established tissue-based deﬁnitions for ischemic stroke and transient
ischemic attack (TIA) that have important implications for assessing and preventing strokes.48 These deﬁnitions encourage early neurodiagnostic imaging
following a TIA and risk stratiﬁcation for subsequent stroke.
■ Ischemic stroke is “an infarction of CNS tissue” that may be symptomatic or

silent. “Symptomatic ischemic strokes are manifest by clinical signs of focal
or global cerebral, spinal, or retinal dysfunction caused by CNS infarction.
A silent stroke is a documented CNS infarction that was asymptomatic.”
■ TIA is now deﬁned as “a transient episode of neurological dysfunction caused

by focal brain, spinal cord, or retinal ischemia, without acute infarction.” The
AHA/ASA guidelines recommend neurodiagnostic imaging within 24 hours
of symptom onset and routine noninvasive imaging of the carotid and intracranial vessels.

The AHA/ASA report cites the wellvalidated ABCD2 scoring system for
predicting ischemic stroke within 2, 7,
and 90 days after TIA: Age ≥60 years,
initial Blood pressure ≥140/90 mm Hg,
Clinical features of focal weakness or
impaired speech without focal weakness, Duration 10 to 59 minutes or
≥60 minutes, and Diabetes.48

TIAs are a major risk factor for stroke, which occurs in 3% to 10% of patients
within 2 days and in 9% to 17% within 90 days.47 Short-term stroke risk is highest in those with age 60 years and older, diabetes, focal symptoms of weakness
or impaired speech, and a TIA lasting more than 10 minutes. One population-based
study found a combined risk for recurrent TIA/stroke/and death of 25% within
the 3 months following a TIA.50
726

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

Stroke at a Glance
Key Facts for Prevention and Patient Education
● Stroke aﬀects nearly 800,000 Americans each year, including more than
600,000 suﬀering a ﬁrst stroke, and accounts for about 1 in every 20 deaths.
● The total annual costs associated with stroke are estimated to be about $34
billion.
● Stroke prevalence and mortality are disproportionately higher in African
Americans compared to whites:
● Prevalence, black versus white men: 4.2% versus 2.2%; black versus white
women: 4.7% versus 2.5%
● Mortality per 100,000, black versus white men: 55 versus 36; black versus
white women: 47 versus 36

Cardiovascular causes of death,
including stroke, are the greatest contributors to the 5-year disparity in life
expectancy for African American men
compared to white men and the
4-year racial disparity for women.49
However, the racial gap in life expectancy has recently been declining.
See Chapter 9, Cardiovascular System,
for discussion of the AHA 2011 guidelines for preventing cardiovascular
disease in women that address the
increased risk of mid-life stroke and
death from coronary heart disease,
pp. 362–363.52

Although younger and middle-aged women have lower age-speciﬁc stroke
incidence rates than men, rates increase with age so that women, who on
average live longer than men, have an overall higher lifetime risk for stroke.
Risk factors for women include autoimmune collagen vascular disease and
history of preeclampsia, gestational diabetes, and pregnancy-induced hypertension.
● The prevalence of silent stroke, estimated to range from 6% to 28%, increases
with age.
● Individuals with TIA have a 1-year mortality of ∼12%; 10-year risks for stroke
and death from cardiovascular disease are 19% and 43%, respectively.
● Only 51% of the United States population is aware of the ﬁve stroke warning
signs (see below) and would call 911 if they thought someone was having a
stroke.
● Stroke outcomes improve signiﬁcantly when thrombolytic therapy is given
within 3 to 4.5 hours of symptom onset; however, only a minority of those
suﬀering a stroke reaches an emergency room within this time window.
●

Sources: Mozaﬀarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, et al. Heart disease and stroke statistics—2015 update:
a report from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2015;131:e29; Bushnell C, McCullough LD,
Awad IA, et al. Guidelines for the prevention of stroke in women: a statement for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2014;45:1545;
Jauch EC, Saver JL, Adams HP, Jr., et al. Guidelines for the early management of patients with acute
ischemic stroke: a guideline for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/
American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2013;44:870.

Symptoms and signs of stroke depend on the vascular territory affected in the
brain. The most common cause of ischemic symptoms is occlusion of the middle cerebral artery, which causes visual ﬁeld cuts and contralateral hemiparesis
and sensory deﬁcits. Occlusion of the left middle cerebral artery often produces aphasia; and occlusion of the right middle cerebral artery, neglect or
inattention to the opposite side of the body.

See Table 17-2, Types of Stroke,
pp. 776–777.
See Chapter 5, p. 160, and Table 17-6,
Disorders of Speech, p. 784, for discussion of aphasia.

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

727

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Stroke Warning Signs. The AHA and the ASA urge patients to seek
immediate care for any of the warning signs below. It is important to teach these
to your patients.

AHA/ASA Stroke Warning Signs and Symptoms
F Face Drooping—Does one side of the face droop or is it numb?53 Ask the person to smile. Is the person’s smile uneven?
A Arm Weakness—Is one arm weak or numb? Ask the person to raise both arms.
Does one arm drift downward?
S Speech Diﬃculty—Is speech slurred? Is the person unable to speak or hard to
understand? Ask the person to repeat a simple sentence, like “The sky is blue.”
Is the sentence repeated correctly?
T Time to call 9-1-1—If someone shows any of these symptoms, even if the
symptoms go away, call 9-1-1 and get the person to the hospital immediately.
Check the time so you’ll know when the ﬁrst symptoms appeared
Beyond FAST: Other important symptoms
● Sudden numbness or weakness of the leg, arm, or face
● Sudden confusion or trouble understanding
● Sudden trouble seeing in one or both eyes
● Sudden trouble walking, dizziness, loss of balance or coordination
● Sudden severe headache with no known cause

Stroke Risk Factors—Primary Prevention. Recognizing that stroke
and coronary heart disease share common cardiovascular risk factors and
threats to health, in 2010, Healthy People 2020 and the AHA presented a new
concept of “cardiovascular health” that encompasses seven health behaviors
and health factors, and a new set of combined impact goals for the coming
decade:

See Chapter 9, Cardiovascular System,
for discussion of the new more
aggressive guidelines for cardiovascular screening and the table on cardiovascular health behaviors and health
factors, pp. 363–364.

By 2020, to improve the cardiovascular health of all Americans by 20%, while
reducing deaths from cardiovascular disease and stroke by 20%.54
For primary prevention, target documented modiﬁable risk factors, detailed in
the box below. Learn the indications for using aspirin in healthy and diabetic
individuals.55,56
Optimal blood pressure control is essential for preventing hemorrhagic stroke.
Additional risk factors for the most common cause of hemorrhagic stroke—
ruptured aneurysms in the circle of Willis—include smoking, alcohol use, oral
contraceptives, and family history in a ﬁrst-degree relative.

728

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

Stroke Risk Factors—Primary Prevention
of Ischemic Stroke
Documented and Modiﬁable Risk Factors

Hypertension

Smoking

Dyslipidemia

Diabetes

Weight
Diet and
nutrition

Physical
inactivity
Alcohol use

Hypertension is the leading risk factor for both ischemic and
hemorrhagic stroke. Pharmacologic reduction of blood pressure signiﬁcantly reduces stroke risk, particularly among African Americans and older adults.
Smoking is associated with doubling the risk of ischemic stroke
and a 2- to 4-fold increased risk of subarachnoid hemorrhage.
Smoking cessation rapidly reduces the risk of stroke, but
never to the level of never-smokers.
Statin treatment reduces the risk of all strokes by about 20%
for patients with or at risk for atherosclerotic cardiovascular
disease.
Stroke risk is doubled with diabetes and 20% of diabetic patients
will die of stroke. Good blood pressure control and statin therapy reduce stroke risk in diabetic patients.
Obesity increases the risk of ischemic stroke by 64%.
Dietary factors aﬀect stroke risk primarily by elevating blood
pressure. Decreasing salt and saturated fat intake and diets
emphasizing fruits, vegetables, nuts, and low-fat dairy products may reduce stroke risk.
Moderate exercise, like brisk walking for 150 minutes a week
or 30 minutes on most days, improves cardiovascular
health.
Alcohol use has a direct dose-dependent eﬀect on the risk of
hemorrhagic stroke. Heavy alcohol use increases the risk for
all types of stroke due to eﬀects on hypertension, hypercoagulable states, cardiac arrhythmias, and reduced cerebral
blood ﬂow.

Disease-Speciﬁc Risk Factors

Atrial
ﬁbrillation

Valvular (rheumatic) and nonvalvular atrial ﬁbrillation
increases risk of stroke between 2- to 7-fold and 17-fold,
respectively, compared to the general population.
Antiplatelet agents and anticoagulants can reduce the risk for
ischemic stroke. When considering antithrombotic therapy,
experts recommend individual risk stratiﬁcation into high-,
moderate-, and low-risk groups to balance risk of stroke
against risk of bleeding. CHADS2 is a commonly used scoring system based on Congestive heart failure, Hypertension, Age ≥75 years, Diabetes, and prior Stroke/TIA. The
CHA2DS2-VASc, which adds an age category of 65 to
74 years, female sex, and vascular disease to the scoring
system, improves risk stratiﬁcation for individuals estimated as low or moderate risk with CHADS2.
(continued )

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

729

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Stroke Risk Factors—Primary Prevention
of Ischemic Stroke (continued )
Carotid artery
disease

Obstructive
sleep apnea

The estimated prevalence of clinically important carotid artery
stenosis in the United States population over age 65 years is
1%. Medical therapy, including statins, antiplatelet agents,
treatment of diabetes and hypertension, and smoking cessation, has reduced the risk of stroke in individuals with asymptomatic carotid artery stenosis to less than 2% annually.
Experts recommend carotid endarterectomy for selected
asymptomatic patients with carotid artery stenosis >60%—
provided that the surgeon and center have very low perioperative risks for stroke and mortality.
Sleep apnea is an independent risk factor for stroke, particularly
in men. Stroke risk increases with increasing sleep apnea
severity as measured by the number of respiratory events
(cessation or air ﬂow reduction) per hour. Sleep apnea is usually treated with continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP),
though its eﬀectiveness for reducing stroke risk is unknown.

Sources: Meschia JF, Bushnell C, Boden-Albala B, et al. Guidelines for the primary prevention of
stroke: a statement for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/American
Stroke Association. Stroke. 2014;45:3754; Mozaﬀarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, et al. Heart disease
and stroke statistics—2015 update: a report from the American Heart Association. Circulation.
2015;131:e29; Bushnell C, McCullough LD, Awad IA, et al. Guidelines for the prevention of stroke in
women: a statement for healthcare professionals from the American Heart Association/American
Stroke Association. Stroke. 2014;45:1545; Fuster V, Ryden LE, Cannom DS, et al. 2011 ACCF/AHA/HRS
focused updates incorporated into the ACC/AHA/ESC 2006 Guidelines for the management of
patients with atrial ﬁbrillation: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines developed in partnership with the European Society of Cardiology and in collaboration with the European Heart Rhythm Association and
the Heart Rhythm Society. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;57:e101.

Screening for Asymptomatic Carotid Artery Stenosis. Carotid
duplex ultrasound accurately and safely detects signiﬁcant carotid artery stenosis
and is widely used for evaluating symptomatic patients. Although asymptomatic
carotid artery stenosis is a stroke risk, it accounts for only a small proportion of
ischemic strokes. Based on a systematic review, the U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force (USPSTF) recommended against screening for asymptomatic carotid artery
stenosis in the general adult population (grade D).57 The USPSTF found no evidence that ultrasound screening reduced the risk for ipsilateral stroke.58 Given that
the population prevalence of asymptomatic carotid artery stenosis is only 1%,
screening would lead to many false-positive results. Furthermore, treating asymptomatic patients incurs risks for strokes, death, and other harms.
TIA and Stroke—Secondary Prevention. For the patient who has
already suffered TIA or stroke, focus on: identifying the underlying cause
including noncardiac emboli, cardiac emboli, and carotid artery stenosis;
reducing cardiovascular risk factors, including inactivity, hyperlipidemia, poorly
controlled diabetes or hypertension, smoking, and heavy alcohol consumption;
and identifying the most appropriate interventions for secondary prevention,
730

History and careful neurologic examination to assess level of consciousness and focal findings are essential
for diagnosing stroke, followed by
neuroimaging to distinguish ischemic
from hemorrhagic stroke.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
including antiplatelet agents, anticoagulants, and carotid revascularization.59
Strokes in young adults often have a different set of causes—patent foramen
ovale and less commonly, carotid or vertebral/basilar artery dissection, hypercoagulable states, or cocaine and illicit drug use.60

Stroke subtypes include: TIA; ischemic—
cardioembolic, large artery atherosclerotic, lacunar, or cryptogenic;
hemorrhagic—intracerebral, subarachnoid; and other—dural sinus venous
thrombosis, carotid and vertebral artery
dissection, or asymptomatic aneurysm.61

Reducing Risk of Diabetic Peripheral Neuropathy. Diabetes
causes several types of peripheral neuropathy.62 Maintaining optimal glycemic
control can prevent or delay the onset of neuropathy, particularly from type I
diabetes.
■ Distal symmetric sensorimotor polyneuropathy. This is the most common type of

diabetic neuropathy. It is slowly progressive, often asymptomatic, and a risk
factor for ulcerations, arthropathy, and amputation. Symptomatic patients
report burning electrical pain in the lower extremities, usually at night.
■ Autonomic dysfunction, mononeuropathies, and polyradiculopathies, including

diabetic amyotrophy, which initially causes unilateral thigh pain and proximal
lower extremity weakness.
Diabetic patients should have their feet examined
regularly for neuropathy, including testing pinprick sensation, ankle reﬂexes, vibration perception (with a 128-Hz tuning fork) and plantar light
touch sensation (with a Semmes-Weinstein monoﬁlament), as well as checking for skin breakdown,
poor circulation, and musculoskeletal abnormalities.63 The monoﬁlament test involves pressing
the perpendicular monoﬁlament against the skin
at the great toe and metatarsals until it bends
(Fig. 17-8), or against the dorsal arch if without
calluses; the test is positive if the patient cannot
feel the monoﬁlament.

FIGURE 17-8.

Monoﬁlament test.

Herpes Zoster Vaccination. Herpes zoster, which results from reactivation
of latent varicella (chicken pox) virus infection within the sensory ganglia, usually
causes painful unilateral vesicular rashes in a dermatomal distribution.64 The
lifetime risk of herpes zoster infection is about one in three, and is higher for women
than for men. Up to one in four adults experience complications following infection,
including postherpetic neuralgia (persistent pain in the area of the rash), bacterial
skin infections, ophthalmic complications, cranial and peripheral neuropathies,
encephalitis, pneumonitis, and hepatitis.65 Herpes zoster risk is increased in
immunocompromised conditions including cancer, HIV, bone marrow or organ
transplantation, and immunosuppressive therapies. Increasing age is also strongly
associated with developing both herpes zoster infection and postherpetic neuralgia.

The herpes zoster vaccine effectively reduces the short-term risks for zoster
and postherpetic neuralgia in adults ≥50 years.66 The Advisory Committee on

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

731

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Immunization Practices (ACIP) currently recommends routinely offering onetime vaccination for adults ≥60 years; the Federal Drug Administration has
approved the vaccine for adults ≥50 years. Because the long-term efﬁcacy of the
herpes zoster vaccine is uncertain, the ACIP is re-evaluating the best age to
administer the vaccine and the need for revaccination.
Detecting the “Three Ds”: Delirium, Dementia, and Depression.
Delirium and dementia are increasingly common conditions in clinical practice
and can present with subtle ﬁndings. Keep them in mind as you assess cognition
and mental status. Differentiating depression, cognitive impairment, and altered
consciousness can be challenging. Review the discussion of these disorders in
Chapter 20 and Chapter 5.

See Chapter 20, The Older Adult,
pp. 955–1008, and Table 20-2,
Delirium and Dementia, p. 1001.
See also Chapter 5, Behavior and
Mental Status, pp. 147–171.

Delirium. Delirium, a multifactorial syndrome, is an acute confusional
state marked by sudden onset, ﬂuctuating course, inattention, and at times
changing levels of consciousness. Risk for developing delirium depends on both
predisposing conditions which increase susceptibility and the immediate precipitating factors. About one third of older adults experience delirium during
hospitalizations on medical services; rates are even higher following major elective surgeries. Intensive care unit admissions are associated with a high incidence
of delirium regardless of age. Even though delirium is associated with poor
patient outcomes, more than 50% of cases are undetected.

The Confusional Assessment Method (CAM) algorithm, displayed below, is recommended for screening at-risk patients. The CAM instrument can quickly and accurately
detect delirium at the bedside67; a CAM severity (CAM-S) measure can be used to
predict risks for death and nursing home placement.68 The National Institutes of Health
(NIH) have issued guidelines for preventing delirium that emphasize multicomponent
interventions by interdisciplinary teams targeting key clinical precipitants.69

The Confusion Assessment Method (CAM)
Diagnostic Algorithm
1. Acute change in mental status and ﬂuctuating course
● Is there evidence of an acute change in cognition from baseline?
● Does the abnormal behavior ﬂuctuate during the day?
2. Inattention
● Does the patient have diﬃculty focusing attention?
3. Disorganized thinking
● Does the patient have rambling or irrelevant conversations, unclear or
illogical ﬂow of ideas, or unpredictable switching from subject to subject?
4. Abnormal level of consciousness
● Is the patient anything besides alert—hyperalert, lethargic, stuporous, or
comatose?
Diagnosing delirium requires features 1 and 2 and either 3 or 4.

732

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Dementia. Dementia is characterized by declines in memory and cognitive ability that interfere with activities of daily living.70,71 The most common
types are Alzheimer disease (affecting 5 million Americans over age 65 years),
vascular dementia, Lewy body dementia, and frontotemporal dementia.70,72 Diagnosing dementia requires exclusion of delirium and depression. Teasing out agerelated changes in cognition from mild cognitive impairment is also challenging.
Less than 2% of patients with dementia have potentially reversible causes, such
as hypothyroidism, medication side effects, normal pressure hydrocephalus, or
major depression.

A meta-analysis identiﬁed potentially modiﬁable risk factors for developing
Alzheimer disease, including physical inactivity, depression, smoking, midlife
hypertension, midlife obesity, cognitive inactivity or low educational attainment,
and diabetes.73 However, a 2011 NIH review concluded “currently, no evidence
of even moderate scientiﬁc quality exists to support the association of any modiﬁable factors . . . with reduced risk for Alzheimer disease.”74 The USPSTF did not
ﬁnd convincing evidence that pharmacologic or nonpharmacologic interventions could beneﬁt patients with mild to moderate cognitive impairment.75 Consequently, the USPSTF issued an I statement (insufﬁcient evidence) regarding
screening for cognitive impairment.
Depression. Depression is more common in individuals with signiﬁcant
medical conditions, including several neurologic disorders—dementia, epilepsy,
multiple sclerosis, and Parkinson disease—and is also underdiagnosed. Two
screening questions, with an area under the receiver operating curve (ROC) of
0.93, can accurately identify major depressive disorders: “Have you been feeling
down, depressed, or hopeless (depressed mood)?” and, “Have you felt little interest or pleasure in doing things (anhedonia)?”76 Be sure to assess suicidality and
the possibility of bipolar disorder in depressed patients.

The Mini-Mental State Examination,
which takes 7 to 10 minutes to administer, is the best studied, and at a score
cutpoint of 23 to 24, has a median
likelihood ratio (LR) of 6.3 for a positive test and 0.19 for a negative test.77
See also discussion of the Mini-Cog
on p. 984 and the Mini-Cog screening
tool in Table 20-5, Screening for
Dementia: The Mini-Cog, on p. 1002.

Techniques of Examination
Important Areas of Examination
Mental status—see Chapter 5, Behavior and Mental Status
CNs I through XII
● Motor system: muscle bulk, tone, and strength; coordination, gait, and stance
● Sensory system: pain and temperature, position and vibration, light touch,
discriminative sensation
● Deep tendon, abdominal, and plantar reﬂexes
●
●

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

733

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Return to the four important questions that govern your neurologic evaluation:
■ Does the patient have neurologic disease?
■ If

so, what is the localization of the lesion(s)? Are your findings
symmetric?

■ What is the pathophysiology of the process?
■ What is the preliminary differential diagnosis?

This section presents the techniques you will need for a practical and reasonably
comprehensive examination of the nervous system aligned with recommendations of the American Academy of Neurology.78–80 At ﬁrst, learning the numerous
techniques for a thorough examination may seem difﬁcult. Be an active learner;
seek feedback from your teachers and consulting neurologists to make sure
you are using skilled and proper techniques. Take advantage of the Bates Visual
Guide videos on the nervous system and teaching videos posted by the American
Academy of Neurology and Wright State University.81–83 With supervision and
practice your skills for assessing important neurologic disorders will deepen.
The amount of detail in an appropriate neurologic examination varies widely. In
healthy patients your examination will be relatively brief, as outlined in the
Screening Neurologic Examination recommended by the American Academy of
Neurology provided below. If you detect abnormal ﬁndings, your examination
should be more comprehensive. Be aware that neurologists use many additional
techniques in speciﬁc situations. Whether you conduct a comprehensive or
screening examination, organize your thinking into ﬁve categories: (1) mental
status, speech, and language; (2) CNs; (3) the motor system; (4) the sensory
system; and (5) reﬂexes. If your ﬁndings are abnormal, begin to group them into
patterns of central or peripheral disorders.
For efﬁciency, you should integrate neurologic assessment with other parts of
your examination. Survey the patient’s mental status and speech during the interview even if you do more detailed testing later during the neurologic examination. Assess the CNs as you examine the head and neck, and any neurologic
abnormalities in the arms and legs as you evaluate the peripheral vascular and
musculoskeletal systems. Chapter 1 provides an outline for this kind of integrated approach. Think about, describe, and record your ﬁndings, however, in
terms of the nervous system as a whole.

See Chapter 1, Overview Examination
and History Taking table on “The
Physical Examination: Suggested
Sequence,” p. 20.

American Academy of Neurology: Guidelines
for a Screening Neurologic Examination
Perform a screening neurologic examination in all patients, even those without
neurologic complaints, that is suﬃcient for detection of signiﬁcant neurologic
disease.78 Although the screening examination sequence may vary, it should cover
the major components of the full examination—mental status, CNs, motor system
(strength, gait, and coordination), sensation, and reﬂexes. One example of a
screening examination is given here.
(continued )

734

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

American Academy of Neurology: Guidelines
for a Screening Neurologic Examination (continued )
Mental Status—level of alertness, appropriateness of responses, orientation
to date and place
Cranial Nerves

Vision—visual ﬁelds, funduscopic examination
Pupillary light reﬂex
● Eye movements
● Hearing
● Facial strength—smile, eye closure
●
●

Motor System

Strength—shoulder abduction, elbow extension, wrist extension, ﬁnger
abduction, hip ﬂexion, knee ﬂexion, ankle dorsiﬂexion
● Gait—casual, heel walk, toe walk, tandem walk
● Coordination—ﬁne ﬁnger movements, ﬁnger-to-nose, heel-knee-shin
Sensory System—one modality at toes—can be light touch, pain/temperature, or proprioception
●

Reﬂexes
●
●

Deep tendon reﬂexes—biceps, patellar, Achilles
Plantar responses

Note: If there is reason to suspect neurologic disease based on the patient’s history or the results of any components of the screening examination, a more complete neurologic examination is necessary.
Source: Adapted from the American Academy of Neurology. Available at https://www.aan.com/
uploadedFiles/4CME_and_Training/2Training/3Fellowship_Resources/5Core_Curricula/skilz.pdf.
Accessed July 23, 2015.

The Cranial Nerves
Overview.

The examination of the CNs can be summarized as follows.

Summary: Cranial Nerves I–XII
I
II
II, III
III, IV, VI
V
VII
VIII
IX, X
V, VII, X, XII
XI
XII

Smell
Visual acuity, visual ﬁelds, and ocular fundi
Pupillary reactions
Extraocular movements
Corneal reﬂexes, facial sensation, and jaw movements
Facial movements
Hearing
Swallowing and rise of the palate, gag reﬂex
Voice and speech
Shoulder and neck movements
Tongue symmetry, position, and movement

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

735

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Cranial Nerve I—Olfactory. Test the sense of smell by presenting the
patient with familiar nonirritating odors. First, make sure that each nasal passage
is patent by compressing one side of the nose and asking the patient to sniff
through the other. Then ask the patient to close both eyes. Occlude one nostril
and test smell in the other with substances like cloves, coffee, soap, or vanilla.
Avoid noxious odors like ammonia that might stimulate CN V. Ask the patient to
identify each odor. Test smell on the other side. Normally the patient perceives
odors on each side and identiﬁes them correctly.

Loss of smell occurs in sinus conditions, head trauma, smoking, aging,
use of cocaine, and Parkinson disease.

Cranial Nerve II—Optic. Test visual acuity.

See Chapter 7, Head and Neck, for
more detailed discussion of the techniques for examining Visual Acuity
and Visual Fields, pp. 231–233, Pupils,
pp. 235–236, and the optic fundi using
an ophthalmoscope, pp. 238–242.

Inspect the optic fundi with your ophthalmoscope, paying special attention to
the optic discs.

Inspect each disc carefully for bulging
and blurred margins (papilledema);
pallor (optic atrophy); and cup
enlargement (glaucoma).

Test the visual ﬁelds by confrontation. Test each eye separately, and both eyes
together. Occasionally, in stroke patients, for example, patients will complain of
partial loss of vision, and testing of both eyes reveals a visual ﬁeld defect, an abnormality in peripheral vision such as homonymous hemianopsia. Testing only one eye
would miss this ﬁnding.

See Table 7-6, Visual Field Defects,
p. 273. Look for prechiasmal, or anterior, defects seen in glaucoma, retinal
emboli, optic neuritis (visual acuity
poor); bitemporal hemianopsias from
defects at the optic chiasm, usually
from pituitary tumor; and homonymous hemianopsias or quadrantanopsias in postchiasmal lesions,
usually in the occipital or parietal lobe,
with associated findings of stroke
(visual acuity normal).84

Cranial Nerves II and III—Optic and Oculomotor. Inspect the size and
shape of the pupils, and compare one side with the other. Anisocoria, or a difference of >0.4 mm in the diameter of one pupil compared to the other, is seen in
up to 38% of healthy individuals. Test the pupillary reactions to light.

See Table 7-10, Pupillary Abnormalities, p. 277. If the large pupil reacts
poorly to light or anisocoria worsens
in light, the large pupil has abnormal
pupillary constriction, seen in CN III
palsy. If ptosis and ophthalmoplegia
are also present, consider intracranial
aneurysm if the patient is awake, and
transtentorial herniation if the patient
is comatose.

Also check the near response (p. 230), which tests pupillary constriction (pupillary constrictor muscle), convergence (medial rectus muscles), and accommodation of the lens (ciliary muscle).

If both pupils react to light and anisocoria worsens in darkness, the small
pupil has abnormal pupillary dilation,
seen in Horner syndrome and simple
anisocoria.85

736

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Cranial Nerves III, IV, and VI—Oculomotor, Trochlear, and Abducens. Test the extraocular movements in the six cardinal directions of gaze, and
look for loss of conjugate movements in any of the six directions, which causes
diplopia. Ask the patient which direction makes the diplopia worse and inspect
the eye closely for asymmetric deviation of movement. Determine if the diplopia is monocular or binocular by asking the patient to cover one eye, then the
other.

Check convergence of the eyes.

See Chapter 7, Head and Neck (pp. 237–
238) for a more detailed discussion of
testing extraocular movements.
See Table 7-11, Dysconjugate Gaze,
p. 278. Monocular diplopia is seen in
local problems with glasses or contact
lenses, cataracts, astigmatism, or ptosis. Binocular diplopia occurs in CN III, IV,
and VI neuropathy (40% of patients),
and eye muscle disorders from myasthenia gravis, trauma, thyroid ophthalmopathy, and internuclear
ophthalmoplegia.86

Identify any nystagmus, an involuntary jerking movement of the eyes with quick
and slow components. Note the direction of gaze in which it appears, the plane
of the nystagmus (horizontal, vertical, rotary, or mixed), and the direction of the
quick and slow components. Nystagmus is named for the direction of the quick
component. Ask the patient to ﬁx his or her vision on a distant object and
observe if the nystagmus increases or decreases.

See Table 17-7, Nystagmus, pp. 785–786.
Nystagmus is seen in cerebellar disease, especially with gait ataxia and
dysarthria (increases with retinal fixation), and vestibular disorders
(decreases with retinal fixation); and
in internuclear ophthalmoplegia.

Look for ptosis (drooping of the upper eyelids). A slight difference in the width
of the palpebral ﬁssures is a normal variant in approximately one third of patients.

Ptosis is seen in 3rd nerve palsy (CN III),
Horner syndrome (ptosis, miosis,
forehead anhidrosis), or myasthenia
gravis.

Cranial Nerve V—Trigeminal
Motor. While palpating the temporal and masseter muscles in turn, ask the
patient to ﬁrmly clench the teeth (Figs. 17-9 and 17-10). Note the strength of
muscle contraction. Ask the patient to open and move the jaw from side to side.

Difficulty clenching the jaw or moving
it to the opposite side suggests masseter and lateral pterygoid weakness,
respectively. Jaw deviation during
opening points to weakness on the
deviating side.
Look for unilateral weakness in CN V
pontine lesions; bilateral weakness in
bilateral hemispheric disease.
CNS patterns from stroke include ipsilateral facial and body sensory loss
from contralateral cortical or thalamic
lesions; ipsilateral face, but contralateral body sensory loss in brainstem
lesions.

FIGURE 17-9.
temporal muscles.

Palpate the

FIGURE 17-10.
masseter muscles.

Palpate the

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

737

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Sensory. After explaining what you
plan to do, test the forehead, cheeks, and
chin on each side for pain sensation in the
circled areas in Figure 17-11. The patient’s
eyes should be closed. Use a suitable sharp
object such as a pin or cotton swab. You can
create a sharp wood splinter by breaking or
twisting a cotton swab. To avoid transmitting infection, use a new object for each
patient. While testing, occasionally substitute the blunt end for the point as a contrasting stimulus. Ask the patient to report
whether each stimulus is “sharp” or “dull”
and to compare sides.

Isolated sensory loss occurs in peripheral nerve disorders, including lesions
of the trigeminal nerve (CN V).

FIGURE 17-11.
sensory loss.

Test for facial

If you detect sensory loss, conﬁrm it by testing temperature sensation. Two test
tubes, ﬁlled with hot and ice-cold water, are the traditional stimuli. You can also
use a tuning fork, which usually feels cool, and make it warm or cool with running water. Dry it, then touch the skin and ask the patient to identify “hot” or
“cold.”
Then test for light touch, using a ﬁne wisp of cotton. Ask the patient to respond
whenever you touch the skin.
Corneal Reflex. Test the
corneal reﬂex. Ask the patient
to look up and away from
you and approach from the
opposite side, out of the patient’s line of vision. Avoiding the eyelashes, lightly
touch the cornea (not just
the conjunctiva) with a ﬁne
wisp of cotton (Fig. 17-12).
If the patient is apprehensive
touching the conjunctiva ﬁrst
may be helpful.

FIGURE 17-12.

Test the corneal reﬂex.

Inspect for blinking of both eyes, the normal reaction to this stimulus. The sensory limb of this reﬂex is carried in CN V, and the motor response in CN VII on
both sides. Contact lenses interfere with this testing.

738

Blinking is absent in both eyes in CN V
lesions and on the side of weakness in
lesions of CN VII. Absent blinking and
sensorineural hearing loss occur in
acoustic neuroma.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Cranial Nerve VII—Facial. Inspect the face both at rest and during conversation with the patient. Note any asymmetry, often visible in the nasolabial
folds, and observe any tics or other abnormal movements.

Flattening of the nasolabial fold and
drooping of the lower eyelid suggest
facial weakness.

Ask the patient to:

A peripheral injury to CN VII, as seen
in Bell palsy, affects both the upper
and lower face; a central lesion affects
mainly the lower face. Loss of taste,
hyperacusis, and increased or
decreased tearing also occur in Bell
palsy.87 See Table 17-8, Types of Facial
Paralysis, p. 787.

1. Raise both eyebrows.
2. Frown.
3. Close both eyes tightly so that you cannot open them. Test muscular strength
by trying to open them, as illustrated in
Figure 17-13.
4. Show both upper and lower teeth.
FIGURE 17-13.
muscles.

5. Smile.

Test the eye

In unilateral facial paralysis, the
mouth droops on the paralyzed side
when the patient smiles or grimaces.

6. Puff out both cheeks.
Cranial Nerve VIII—Acoustic and Vestibular. Assess hearing with the
whispered voice test. Ask the patient to repeat numbers whispered into one ear
while blocking or rubbing your ﬁngers next to the contralateral ear.

The whispered voice test is both sensitive (>90%) and specific (>80%)
when assessing presence or absence
of hearing loss.88

If hearing loss is present, determine if the loss is conductive, from impaired “air
through ear” transmission, or sensorineural, from damage to the cochlear branch
of CN VIII. Test for air and bone conduction, using the Rinne test, and lateralization, using the Weber test.

See techniques for Weber and Rinne
tests on pp. 247–248 and Table 7-21,
Patterns of Hearing Loss, p. 289.

Speciﬁc tests of the vestibular function of CN VIII are rarely included in the
typical neurologic examination. Consult textbooks of neurology or otolaryngology as the need arises.

Vertigo with hearing loss and nystagmus typifies Ménière disease. See
Table 7-4, Dizziness and Vertigo, p. 271,
and Table 17-7, Nystagmus, pp. 785–786.
For caloric stimulation testing of comatose patients, see p. 270.

Cranial Nerves IX and X—Glossopharyngeal and Vagus. Listen to the
patient’s voice. Is it hoarse, or does it have a nasal quality?

Hoarseness occurs in vocal cord
paralysis; nasal voice in paralysis of
the palate.

Is there difﬁculty in swallowing?

Difficulty swallowing suggests pharyngeal or palatal weakness.

Excess cerumen, otosclerosis, and otitis media cause conductive hearing
loss; presbyacusis from aging is usually from sensorineural hearing loss.

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

739

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Ask the patient to say “ah” or to yawn as you watch the movements of the soft palate and the pharynx. The soft palate normally rises symmetrically, the uvula
remains in the midline, and each side of the posterior pharynx moves medially,
like a curtain. The slightly curved uvula seen occasionally as a normal variation
should not be mistaken for a uvula deviated by a lesion of CN IX or X.

The palate fails to rise with a bilateral
lesion of CN X. In unilateral paralysis,
one side of the palate fails to rise and,
together with the uvula, is pulled
toward the normal side (see Chapter 7,
p. 257).

Warn the patient that you are going to test the gag reﬂex, which some patients
may refuse. This reﬂex consists of elevation of the tongue and soft palate and
constriction of the pharyngeal muscles. Stimulate the back of the throat lightly
on each side in turn and observe the gag reﬂex. This reﬂex is diminished in many
normally healthy people.

Unilateral absence of this reflex suggests a lesion of CN IX, and perhaps
CN X.

Cranial Nerve XI—Spinal Accessory. Standing behind the patient, look
for atrophy or fasciculations in the trapezius muscles, and compare one side with
the other. Fasciculations are ﬁne ﬂickering irregular movements in small groups
of muscle ﬁbers. Ask the patient to shrug both shoulders upward against your
hands (Fig. 17-14). Note the strength and contraction of the trapezii.

Trapezius weakness with atrophy and
fasciculations points to a peripheral
nerve disorder. In trapezius muscle
paralysis, the shoulder droops, and
the scapula is displaced downward
and laterally.

FIGURE 17-14.

Test trapezius strength.

Ask the patient to turn his or her head to each
side against your hand (Fig. 17-15). Observe
the contraction of the opposite sternocleidomastoid (SCM) muscle and note the force of
the movement against your hand.

A supine patient with bilateral weakness of the SCM muscles has difficulty
raising the head off the pillow.

Cranial Nerve XII—Hypoglossal. Listen
to the articulation of the patient’s words. This
depends on CNs V, VII, IX, and X, as well as XII.
Inspect the patient’s tongue as it lies on the ﬂoor
of the mouth. Look for any atrophy or fasciculations. Some coarser restless movements are
normal. Then, with the patient’s tongue protruded, look for asymmetry, atrophy, or deviation from the midline. Ask the patient to move

For poor articulation, or dysarthria,
see Table 17-6, Disorders of Speech,
p. 784. Tongue atrophy and fasciculations are present in amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis and past polio.

740

F I G U R E 1 7 - 1 5 . Test
sternocleidomastoid strength.

In a unilateral cortical lesion, the protruded tongue deviates away from
the side of the cortical lesion. In CN XII
lesions, the tongue deviates to the
weak side.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
the tongue from side to side, and note the symmetry of the movement. In ambiguous cases, ask the patient to push the tongue against the inside of each cheek
in turn as you palpate externally for strength.

The Motor System
As you assess the motor system, focus on body position, involuntary movements,
characteristics of the muscles (bulk, tone, and strength), and coordination. You
can use this sequence for assessing overall motor function, or check each component in the arms, legs, and trunk in turn. If you detect an abnormality, identify
the muscle(s) involved and if it is central or peripheral in origin. Learn which
nerves innervate the major muscle groups.
Body Position. Observe the patient’s body position during movement and
at rest.

Abnormal positions alert you to conditions such as mono- or hemiparesis
from stroke.

Involuntary Movements. Watch for involuntary movements such as
tremors, tics, chorea, or fasciculations. Note their location, quality, rate, rhythm,
and amplitude, and their relation to posture, activity, fatigue, emotion, and other
factors.

See Table 17-5, Tremors and Involuntary Movements, pp. 782–783.

Muscle Bulk. Inspect the size and contours of muscles. Do the muscles look
ﬂat or concave, suggesting loss of muscle bulk from atrophy or wasting? If so, is
the process unilateral or bilateral? . . . proximal or distal?

Atrophy results from PNS disorders
such as diabetic neuropathy and diseases of the muscles themselves.
Hypertrophy is an increase in bulk
with normal or increased strength;
increased bulk with diminished
strength is called pseudohypertrophy,
seen in the Duchenne form of muscular
dystrophy. Corticospinal tract injury
can cause mild atrophy due to
decreased muscle use.

When inspecting for atrophy, pay particular attention to the hands, shoulders,
thighs, and legs. The spaces between the metacarpals, where the dorsal interosseous muscles lie, should be full or only slightly depressed (Fig. 17-16). The thenar

Interosseous
atrophy

Furrowing between the metacarpals,
and flattening of the thenar and
hypothenar eminences (also seen in
median and ulnar nerve damage
respectively), suggest atrophy.

FIGURE 17-16.
44-year-old woman.

No atrophy—

FIGURE 17-17.
woman.

Atrophy—84-year-old

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

741

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
and hypothenar eminences of the hands should be full and convex (Fig. 17-17).
Atrophy of the hand muscles occurs in normal aging (Figs. 17-18 and 17-19).

Hypothenar atrophy

Thenar flattening
from atrophy

Other causes of muscular atrophy
include motor neuron diseases, diseases affecting the peripheral motor
system projecting from the spinal cord,
and protein–calorie malnutrition.
F I G U R E 1 7 - 1 8 . No atrophy—
44-year-old woman.

FIGURE 17-19.
old woman.

Atrophy—84-year-

Inspect for fasciculations in atrophic muscles. If absent, tap on the muscles with
a reﬂex hammer, which stimulates them.

Fasciculations with atrophy and muscle
weakness suggest peripheral motor
neuron disease.

Muscle Tone. When a normal muscle with an intact nerve supply is relaxed
voluntarily, it maintains a slight residual tension known as muscle tone. This is
best assessed by feeling the muscle’s resistance to passive stretch. Persuade the
patient to relax. Hold one hand with yours and, while supporting the elbow, ﬂex
and extend the patient’s ﬁngers, wrist, and elbow, and put the shoulder through
a moderate range of motion. With practice, you can combine these actions into
a single smooth movement. On each side, note muscle tone—the resistance
offered to your movements. Tense patients may show increased resistance. With
repeated practice, you will learn the feel of normal resistance.

Decreased resistance suggests disease of the PNS or cerebellum, or the
acute stages of spinal cord injury. See
Table 17-9, Disorders of Muscle Tone,
p. 788.

If you suspect decreased resistance, hold the forearm and shake the hand loosely
back and forth. Normally the hand moves back and forth freely but is not completely ﬂoppy.

Marked floppiness indicates muscle
hypotonia or flaccidity, usually from a
peripheral motor system disorder.

If resistance is increased, determine if it varies as you move the limb or persists
throughout the range of movement and in both directions, for example, during
both ﬂexion and extension. Feel for any jerkiness in the resistance.

Spasticity is velocity-dependent
increased tone that worsens at the
extremes of range. Spasticity, seen in
central corticospinal tract diseases, is
rate-dependent, increasing with rapid
movement. Rigidity is increased resistance throughout the range of movement and in both directions; it is not
rate-dependent.

To assess muscle tone in the legs, support the patient’s thigh with one hand,
grasp the foot with the other, and ﬂex and extend the patient’s knee and ankle
on each side. Note the resistance to moving the limb.

742

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Muscle Strength. Normal strength varies widely, so your standard of
normal should allow for factors like age, sex, and muscular training. The patient’s
dominant side is usually slightly stronger than the nondominant side, though
differences can be hard to detect. Keep this difference in mind as you compare
sides.

Impaired strength or weakness is
called paresis. Absent strength is
paralysis, or plegia. Hemiparesis refers
to weakness of one half of the body;
hemiplegia refers to paralysis of one
half of the body. Paraplegia means
paralysis of the legs; quadriplegia
means paralysis of all four limbs.

Test muscle strength by asking the patient to actively resist your movement.
Remember that a muscle is strongest when shortest, and weakest when longest. Give the patient the advantage as you try to overcome the resistance and
judge true the muscle’s true strength. Some patients give way during tests of
muscle strength due to pain, misunderstanding of the test, an effort to help the
examiner, conversion disorder, or malingering.

See Table 17-1, Disorders of the Central and Peripheral Nervous Systems,
pp. 774–775.

If the muscles are too weak to overcome resistance, test them against gravity
alone or with gravity eliminated. When the forearm rests in a pronated position,
for example, dorsiﬂexion at the wrist can be tested against gravity alone. When
the forearm is midway between pronation and supination, extension at the wrist
can be tested with gravity eliminated. Finally, if the patient fails to move the body
part, observe or palpate for weak muscular contraction.

Scale for Grading Muscle Strength
Muscle strength is graded on a 0 to 5 scale:
0 —No muscular contraction detected
1 —A barely detectable flicker or trace of contraction
2 —Active movement of the body part with gravity eliminated
3 —Active movement against gravity
4 —Active movement against gravity and some resistance
5 —Active movement against full resistance without evident fatigue. This is
normal muscle strength.
Source: Medical Research Council. Aids to the examination of the peripheral nervous system.
London: Bailliere Tindall, 1986.

Many clinicians make further distinctions by adding plus or minus signs toward
the stronger end of this scale. Thus, 4+ indicates good but not full strength, while
5− means a trace of weakness.
Methods for testing individual major muscle groups are described in the text that
follows. The spinal root innervations and the muscles affected are shown in
parentheses. To localize lesions in the spinal cord or the PNS more precisely,
consult texts of neurology for specialized additional testing.

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

743

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Test ﬂexion (C5, C6—biceps and brachioradialis) and extension (C6, C7, C8—triceps) at the elbow by having the patient pull and push against your hand (Figs. 17-20
and 17-21).

FIGURE 17-20.

FIGURE 17-21.

Test extension at the wrist
(C6, C7, C8, radial nerve—
extensor carpi radialis longus and brevis) by asking
the patient to make a ﬁst
and resist as you press
down (Fig. 17-22). Or ask
the patient to extend the
forearms with fingers
straight and palms up, then
press the palms downward.

744

Test elbow ﬂexion.

Testing elbow extension.

Extensor weakness is seen in peripheral radial nerve damage, and in the
hemiplegia of CNS disease seen in
stroke or multiple sclerosis.

FIGURE 17-22.

Test wrist extension.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Test the grip (C7, C8, T1). Ask the patient to squeeze two of your ﬁngers as hard
as possible and not let them go (Fig. 17-23). To avoid getting hurt by strong
grips, place your own middle ﬁnger on top of your index ﬁnger. Normally it
should be difﬁcult for you to pull your ﬁngers from the patient’s grip. Test both
grips simultaneously with the patient’s arms extended or in the lap to help compare the right handgrip with the left.

FIGURE 17-23.

Test grip strength.

Test ﬁnger abduction (C8, T1, ulnar nerve). Position the patient’s hand with palm
down and ﬁngers spread. Instruct the patient to prevent you from moving any
ﬁngers as you try to force them together (Fig. 17-24).

FIGURE 17-24.

A weak grip is seen in cervical radiculopathy, median or ulnar peripheral
nerve disease, and pain from de Quervain tenosynovitis, carpal tunnel syndrome, arthritis, and epicondylitis.

Weak finger abduction occurs in ulnar
nerve disorders.

Test ﬁnger abduction.

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

745

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Test opposition of the thumb (C8, T1, median nerve). Ask the patient to touch the
tip of the little ﬁnger with the thumb, against your resistance (Fig. 17-25).

Inspect for weak opposition of the
thumb in median nerve disorders
such as carpal tunnel syndrome (see
Chapter 16, p. 664).

FIGURE 17-25.

Test opposition of the thumb.

You may already have assessed muscle strength of the trunk during other segments
of the examination, namely:
■ Flexion, extension, and lateral bending of the spine
■ Thoracic expansion and diaphragmatic excursion during respiration.

Test ﬂexion at the hip (L2, L3, L4—iliopsoas) by
placing your hand on the patient’s mid-thigh
and asking the patient to raise the leg against
your hand (Fig. 17-26).

F I G U R E 1 7 - 2 6 . Test hip ﬂexion.

Test adduction at the hips (L2, L3, L4—adductors). Place your hands ﬁrmly on the
bed between the patient’s knees. Ask the patient to bring both legs together.
Test abduction at the hips (L4, L5, S1—gluteus medius and minimus). Place your
hands ﬁrmly outside the patient’s knees. Ask the patient to spread both legs
against your hands.
746

Symmetric weakness of the proximal
muscles suggests myopathy; symmetric weakness of distal muscles suggests polyneuropathy, or disorders of
peripheral nerves.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Test extension at the hips (S1—gluteus maximus). Have the patient push the mid
posterior thigh down against your hand.
Test extension at the knee (L2, L3, L4—quadriceps). Support the knee in ﬂexion
and ask the patient to straighten the leg against your hand (Fig. 17-27). The
quadriceps is the strongest muscle in the body, so expect a forceful response.

FIGURE 17-27.

Test knee extension.

Test ﬂexion at the knee (L4, L5, S1, S2—hamstrings) as shown below. Position the
patient’s leg so that the knee is ﬂexed with the foot resting on the bed. Tell the
patient to keep the foot down as you try to straighten the leg (Fig. 17-28).

FIGURE 17-28.

Test knee ﬂexion.

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

747

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Test foot dorsiﬂexion (mainly L4, L5—tibialis anterior) and plantar ﬂexion (mainly
S1—gastrocnemius, soleus) at the ankle by asking the patient to pull up and
push down against your hand (Figs. 17-29 and 17-30). Heel and toe walk also
assess foot dorsiﬂexion and plantar ﬂexion, respectively.

FIGURE 17-29.

Test ankle dorsiﬂexion.

FIGURE 17-30.

Testing plantar ﬂexion.

Coordination. Coordination of muscle movement requires four areas of the
nervous system to function in an integrated way:
■ The motor system, for muscle strength
■ The cerebellar system (also part of the motor system), for normal rhythmic

movement and steady posture
748

In cerebellar disease, look for nystagmus,
dysarthria, hypotonia, and ataxia.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ The vestibular system, for balance and for coordinating eye, head, and body

movements
■ The sensory system, for position sense

To assess coordination, observe the patient performing:
■ Rapid alternating movements
■ Point-to-point movements
■ Gait and other related body movements
■ Standing in speciﬁed ways

Rapid Alternating Movements

Show the patient how to strike
one hand on the thigh, raise the hand, turn
it over, and then strike the back of the hand
down on the same place. Urge the patient to
repeat these alternating movements as rapidly
as possible (Fig. 17-31).

In cerebellar disease, instead of alternating quickly, these movements are
slow, irregular, and clumsy, an abnormality called dysdiadochokinesis.
Upper motor neuron weakness and
basal ganglia disease can also impair
these movements, but not in the same
manner.

Arms.

Observe the speed, rhythm, and smoothness of
the movements. Repeat with the other hand.
The nondominant hand may perform less well.

F I G U R E 1 7 - 3 1 . Test rapid
alternating arm movement.

Show the patient how to tap the distal joint of
the thumb with the tip of the index ﬁnger,
again as rapidly as possible (Fig. 17-32). Again,
observe the speed, rhythm, and smoothness of
the movements. The nondominant side often
performs less well.

F I G U R E 1 7 - 3 2 . Test rapid
ﬁnger tapping.

Legs. Ask the patient to tap the ball of each foot in turn as quickly as possible on your hand or the ﬂoor. Note any slowness or awkwardness. Normally
the feet do not perform as well as the hands.

Dysdiadochokinesis points to
cerebellar disease.

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

749

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Point-to-Point Movements
Arms—Finger-to-Nose Test. Ask the patient to touch your index ﬁnger and
then his or her nose alternately several times. Move your ﬁnger so that the
patient has to change directions and extend the arm fully to reach your ﬁnger.
Observe the accuracy and smoothness of movement, and watch for any tremor.

In cerebellar disease, movements are
clumsy, unsteady, and inappropriately
variable in their speed, force, and
direction. In dysmetria the patient’s finger may initially overshoot the mark,
but then reach it fairly well. An intention tremor may appear toward the end
of the movement. See Table 17-5,
Tremors and Involuntary Movements,
p. 782.

Now hold your ﬁnger in one place so that the patient can touch it with one arm
and ﬁnger outstretched. Ask the patient to raise the arm overhead and lower it
again to touch your ﬁnger. After several repeats, ask the patient to close both eyes
and try several more times. Repeat on the other side. Normally the patient
touches the examiner’s ﬁnger successfully with eyes open or closed. These
maneuvers test position sense and the function of both the labyrinth of the inner
ear and the cerebellum.

In cerebellar disease, incoordination
modestly worsens with eyes closed,
indicating loss of position sense. Consistent deviation to one side which
worsens with the eyes closed, referred
to as past pointing, suggests cerebellar
or vestibular disease.

Legs—Heel-to-Shin Test.

Ask the patient to place one heel on the opposite knee, then run it down the shin to the big toe. Observe this movement for
smoothness and accuracy. Repetition with the patient’s eyes closed tests for position sense. Repeat on the other side.

In cerebellar disease, the heel may
overshoot the knee, then oscillate
from side to side down the shin. If
position sense is absent, the heel lifts
too high and the patient tries to look.
With eyes closed, performance is poor.

Gait. Ask the patient to:

Gait abnormalities increase risk of
falls.

■ Walk across the room or down the hall,

A uncoordinated gait with reeling and
instability is ataxic. Ataxia is seen in cerebellar disease, loss of position sense,
and intoxication. See Table 17-10,
Abnormalities of Gait and Posture,
p. 789.

then turn and come back. Observe
posture, balance, swinging of the
arms, and movements of the legs.
Normally balance is intact, the arms
swing symmetrically at the sides, and
turns are smooth.
■ Walk heel-to-toe in a straight line—

Tandem walking may reveal ataxia
that is not otherwise obvious.

called tandem walking (Fig. 17-33).
■ Walk on the toes, then on the heels—

Walking on toes and heels may reveal
distal leg weakness. Inability to heelwalk is a sensitive test for corticospinal
tract damage.

this tests plantar ﬂexion and dorsiﬂexion of the ankles as well as
balance.

FIGURE 17-33.
heel-to-toe.

750

Test walking

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Hop in place on each foot in turn (if

Difficulty hopping points to
weakness, lack of position sense,
or cerebellar dysfunction.

the patient is not too ill)—this tests
proximal and distal muscle strength
in the legs and requires both normal position sense and cerebellar
function.
■ Do a shallow knee bend, ﬁrst on one

Difficulty doing shallow knee bends
suggests proximal weakness (extensors of the hip), weakness of the quadriceps (extensor of the knee), or both.

leg, then on the other (Fig. 17-34).
Steady the patient if you think the
patient might fall.
■ Or alternatively, rise from a sitting

Proximal muscle weakness in the pelvic girdle and legs causes difficulty
with both of these activities. See
Chapter 20, “Get up and go test,”
p. 996.

position without arm support and step
up on a sturdy stool—if the patient is
unsteady, neurologically impaired, or
frail these tests are more suitable than
hopping or knee bends.
FIGURE 17-34.
knee bends.

Test shallow

Stance. The following two tests can often be performed concurrently.
They differ only in the patient’s arm position and in what you are assessing. In
each case, stand close enough to the patient to prevent a fall.

This is mainly a test of position sense. The patient should
ﬁrst stand with feet together and eyes open and then close both eyes for 30 to
60 seconds without support. Note the patient’s ability to maintain an upright
posture. Normally any swaying is minimal.

In ataxia from dorsal column disease
and loss of position sense, vision
compensates for the sensory loss.
The patient stands fairly well with
eyes open but loses balance when
they are closed, a positive Romberg
sign. In cerebellar ataxia, the patient
has difficulty standing with feet
together whether the eyes are open
or closed.

Test for Pronator Drift. The patient should stand for 20 to 30 seconds with
eyes closed and both arms held straight forward with palms up (Fig. 17-35).
Normally patients hold this arm position well. If necessary, patients can be tested
in the sitting position.

Pronator drift occurs when one
forearm and palm turn inward and
down (Fig. 17-36) and is both sensitive
and specific for a corticospinal tract
lesion in the contralateral hemisphere.
Downward drift of the arm with
flexion of fingers and elbow is also
seen.89–92

The Romberg Test.

Next, instruct the patient to keep the arms out and eyes shut and tap the arms
briskly downward. The arms normally return smoothly to the horizontal position.
This response requires muscular strength, coordination, and good position
sense.

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

751

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

FIGURE 17-36.
pronator drift.

FIGURE 17-35.

Test for pronator drift.

Positive test for

In loss of position sense the arms drift
sideward or upward, sometimes with
writhing movements of the hands; the
patient may not recognize the displacement and when asked, corrects
it poorly. In cerebellar incoordination,
the arm returns to its original position
but overshoots and bounces.

The Sensory System
To evaluate the sensory system, you will test several kinds of sensation:
■ Pain and temperature (spinothalamic tracts)
■ Position and vibration (posterior columns)
■ Light touch (both of these pathways)
■ Discriminative sensations, which depend on some of the above sensations

but also involve the cortex
Assess the patient carefully as you consider the following questions: Is the underlying lesion central or peripheral? Is the sensory loss bilateral or unilateral? Does
the pattern of sensory loss suggest a dermatomal distribution, a polyneuropathy,
or a spinal cord syndrome with a loss of pain and temperature sensation but
intact touch and vibration below a given spinal level?

See Table 17-1, Disorders of the Central and Peripheral Nervous Systems,
pp. 774–775.

Learn to perform tests for different kinds of sensation when indicated. Correlate
any abnormal ﬁndings with motor and reﬂex activity to establish the location of
the causative lesion. To improve your physical diagnosis of the many conditions
with impaired sensation, it is important to work closely with specialists and
reﬁne your skills of examination.

Refer to specialty textbooks for discussion of spinal cord syndromes with
crossed sensory findings, both ipsilateral and contralateral to the spinal
cord injury.

752

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Patterns of Testing. Because sensory testing is tiring for many patients
and can produce unreliable results, conduct the examination as efﬁciently as
possible. Focus on areas that have numbness or pain, motor or reﬂex abnormalities suggesting a lesion of the spinal cord or PNS, and trophic changes
such as absent or excessive sweating, atrophic skin, or cutaneous ulceration.
You will often need to retest at another time to conﬁrm abnormalities.

Meticulous sensory mapping helps
establish the level of a spinal cord
lesion and whether a more peripheral
lesion is in a nerve root, a major
peripheral nerve, or one of its
branches.

The following patterns of testing help you to identify sensory deﬁcits accurately
and efﬁciently.

Tips for Detecting Sensory Deﬁcits
Compare symmetric areas on the two sides of the body, including the arms,
legs, and trunk.

A hemisensory loss pattern suggests a
lesion in the contralateral cerebral
hemisphere; a sensory level (when one
or more sensory modalities are reduced
below a dermatome on one or both
sides) suggests a spinal cord lesion.

For pain, temperature, and touch sensation, compare distal to proximal areas
of the extremities. Scatter the stimuli to sample most of the dermatomes
and major peripheral nerves (see pp. 756–757). One suggested pattern is to
include:
● both shoulders (C4)
● the inner and outer aspects of the forearms (C6 and T1)
● the thumbs and little ﬁngers (C6 and C8)
● the fronts of both thighs (L2)
● the medial and lateral aspects of both legs (L4 and L5)
● the little toes (S1)
● the medial aspect of each buttock (S3)
● For vibration and position sensation, test the ﬁngers and toes ﬁrst. If these
are normal, you may safely assume that more proximal areas are also be
normal.
● Vary the pace of your testing so that the
patient does not merely respond to your
repetitive rhythm.
● When you detect an area of sensory loss or
hypersensitivity, map out its boundaries in
detail. Stimulate ﬁrst at a point of reduced
sensation, then in progressive steps until the
patient reports a change to normal sensation.
An example is shown here.

Symmetric distal sensory loss suggests a diabetic polyneuropathy. You
may miss this finding unless you compare distal and proximal sensation.

●

●

Here, all sensation in the hand is lost.
Repetitive testing in a proximal direction reveals a gradual return to normal sensation at the wrist. This
pattern does not fit either peripheral
nerve damage or dermatomal loss
(see pp. 756–757). If bilateral, it suggests the “glove” of the “stockingglove” sensory loss of polyneuropathy,
often seen in alcoholism and diabetes.

Before each of the following tests, show the patient what you plan to do and
explain how you would like the patient to respond. The patient’s eyes should be
closed during actual testing.
C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

753

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Pain. Use a sharp safety pin, the stick portion of a broken cotton swab, or
other suitable tool. Occasionally, substitute the blunt end for the point. Ask the
patient, “Is this sharp or dull?” or, when making comparisons, “Does this feel the
same as this?” Apply the lightest pressure needed for the stimulus to feel sharp;
avoid heavy pricks that draw blood.

Analgesia refers to absence of pain
sensation, hypalgesia refers to
decreased sensitivity to pain, and
hyperalgesia refers to increased pain
sensitivity.

To prevent transmitting a bloodborne infection, discard the pin or other device
safely. Do not reuse it on another person.
Temperature. Testing skin temperature is often omitted if pain sensation is
normal. If there are sensory deﬁcits, use two test tubes ﬁlled with hot and cold
water, or a tuning fork heated or cooled by running water. Touch the skin and
ask the patient to identify “hot” or “cold.”
Light Touch. With a ﬁne wisp of cotton, touch the skin lightly, avoiding
pressure. Ask the patient to respond whenever a touch is felt, and to compare
one area with another. Avoid testing calloused skin, which is normally relatively
insensitive.

Anesthesia is absence of touch sensation, hypesthesia is decreased sensitivity to touch, and hyperesthesia is
increased sensitivity.

Vibration. Use a relatively low-pitched
tuning fork of 128 Hz. Tap it on the heel of
your hand and place it ﬁrmly over a distal
interphalangeal joint of the patient’s ﬁnger,
then over the interphalangeal joint of the big
toe (Fig. 17-37). Ask what the patient feels.
If you are not sure whether the patient is
feeling pressure or vibration, ask the patient
to tell you when the vibration stops. Then
touch the tuning fork to stop it from vibrating
and conﬁrm this change with the patient. If
vibration sense is impaired, proceed to more
proximal bony prominences (e.g., wrist,
elbow; medial malleolus, shin, patella,
anterior superior iliac spine, spinous
processes, and clavicles).

Vibration sense is often the first
sensation lost in a peripheral
neuropathy and increases the
likelihood of peripheral neuropathy
16-fold.8 Causes include diabetes,
alcoholism, and posterior column
disease, seen in tertiary syphilis or
vitamin B12 deficiency.93

FIGURE 17-37.
sense.

Test vibration

Proprioception (Joint Position
Sense). Grasp the patient’s big toe,
holding it by its sides between your thumb
and index ﬁnger, then pull it away from
the other toes (Fig. 17-38). This prevents
extraneous tactile stimuli from affecting
testing. Demonstrate “up” and “down”
as you move the patient’s toe clearly
upward and downward. Then, with the
patient’s eyes closed, ask the patient to
say “up” or “down” when moving the
large toe in a small arc.

Testing vibration sense in the trunk is
useful when identifying the level of a
cord lesion.

Loss of position sense, like loss of
vibration sense, is seen in tabes dorsalis, multiple sclerosis, or B12 deficiency
from posterior column disease, and in
diabetic neuropathy.

F I G U R E 1 7 - 3 8 . Test proprioception.

754

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Repeat the test several times on each side. If position sense is impaired, move
proximally to test the ankle joint. In a similar fashion, test position in the ﬁngers,
moving proximally, if indicated, to the metacarpophalangeal joints, wrist, and
elbow.
Discriminative Sensations. Several additional techniques test the
ability of the sensory cortex to correlate, analyze, and interpret sensations.
Because discriminative sensations depend on touch and position sense, they are
useful only when these sensations are either intact or only slightly impaired.

Screen a patient with stereognosis, and proceed to other methods, if indicated.
The patient’s eyes should be closed during all these tests.
■ Stereognosis. Stereognosis refers to

Astereognosis refers to the inability to
recognize objects placed in the hand.

the ability to identify an object by
feeling it. Place a familiar object
such as a coin, paper clip, key, pencil, or cotton ball, in the patient’s
hand and ask the patient to tell you
what it is. Normally a patient will
manipulate it skillfully and identify
it correctly within 5 seconds. Asking
the patient to distinguish “heads”
from “tails” on a coin is a sensitive
test of stereognosis.
■ Number identiﬁcation (graphesthesia).

If arthritis or other conditions prevent the patient from manipulating
an object well enough to identify it,
test the ability to identify numbers.
With the blunt end of a pen or pencil, draw a large number in the patient’s palm (Fig. 17-39). A normally
abled person can identify most such
numbers.

If touch and position sense are normal, decreased or absent discriminative sensation indicates a lesion in the
sensory cortex. Stereognosis, number
identification, and two-point discrimination are also impaired in posterior
column disease.

The inability to recognize numbers, or
graphanesthesia, indicates a lesion in
the sensory cortex.

F I G U R E 1 7 - 3 9 . Test stereognosis.

■ Two-point discrimination. Using the

two ends of an opened paper clip, or
two pins, touch a ﬁnger pad in two
places simultaneously (Fig. 17-40).
Alternate the double stimulus irregularly with a one-point touch. Be
careful not to cause pain.
FIGURE 17-40.
discrimination.

Test two-point

Find the minimal distance at which the patient can discriminate one from
two points (normally <5 mm on the ﬁnger pads). This test may be used on
other parts of the body, but normal distances vary widely from one body
region to another.

Lesions of the sensory cortex increase
the distance between two recognizable
points.

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

755

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Point localization. Brieﬂy touch a point on the patient’s skin. Then ask the

patient to open both eyes and point to the place touched. Normally a person
can do so accurately.
■ Extinction. Stimulate one side or simultaneously stimulate corresponding

areas on both sides of the body. Ask where the patient feels your touch. Normally both stimuli are felt.

Dermatomes. Knowledge of dermatomes helps you localize neurologic
lesions to a speciﬁc level of the spinal cord, particularly in spinal cord injury. A
dermatome is the band of skin innervated by the sensory root of a single spinal nerve.
Dermatome and peripheral nerve patterns are illustrated in Figures 17-41 to
17-44, which reﬂect the international standard recommended by the American

Lesions of the sensory cortex impair
the ability to localize points accurately.
With lesions of the sensory cortex,
only one stimulus may be recognized.
The stimulus to the side opposite the
damaged cortex is extinguished.
In spinal cord injury, the sensory level
may be several segments lower than
the spinal lesion, for reasons that are
not well understood. Percussing for
the level of vertebral pain may be
helpful.

C2
C3 Front of neck
C3
C4
T2
T3

C5

Radial
nerve

Ulnar
nerve

C5

T4
T4 Nipples

T5
T6
T7
T8
T9

C6
T1

C6
T1

T10

T10 Umbilicus

T11
L1 Inguinal

T12
L1

Median
nerve

L2

C8

C8

C7

Lateral
cutaneous
nerve of
thigh

C7
S2,3

L3

L3
C8 Ring and
little fingers

Anterior
femoral
cutaneous
nerve

L4

L4
L4 Knee

Lateral
cutaneous
nerve of
leg

L5

Superficial
peroneal
nerve

S1

Cutaneous
branches of
saphenous
nerve

F I G U R E 1 7 - 4 1 . Areas
innervated by peripheral nerves.

756

L2

L5

S1

L5 Anterior
ankle and foot

FIGURE 17-42.
by posterior roots.

Dermatomes innervated

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Spinal Injury Association.94 Dermatome levels are more variable than these
diagrams suggest. They overlap at their upper and lower margins and also
slightly across the midline.
Do not try to memorize all the dermatomes. Instead, focus on learning the dermatomes shaded in green.

C2
C5
C6
C7
C8

C3

C3 Back of neck
T1
C4

T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
S1
S2

C5

C6
T1

Ulnar
nerve

Radial
nerve

C5

C6
T1

S3
S4

C6
Thumb

S5
C8

C8

C7

C7

S5 Perianal

C8 Ring and
little fingers

Median
nerve
Lateral
cutaneous
nerve of
thigh
Posterior
femoral
cutaneous
nerve
Lateral
cutaneous
nerve of leg

S1

S2

S2

Superficial
peroneal
nerve
Sural
nerve

F I G U R E 1 7 - 4 3 . Areas
innervated by peripheral nerves.

S1

L4, L5, S1
Posterior ankle
and foot
L4

L4

L5

L5

F I G U R E 1 7 - 4 4 . Dermatomes innervated
by posterior roots.

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

757

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

Muscle Stretch Reﬂexes
Eliciting the muscle stretch reﬂexes
requires special handling of the reﬂex
hammer. Select a properly weighted
reﬂex hammer, and learn the different
uses of the pointed end and the ﬂat
end. For example, the pointed end is
useful for striking small areas, such as
your ﬁnger as it overlies the biceps tendon. Test the reﬂexes as follows:
■ Encourage

the patient to relax,
then position the limbs properly
and symmetrically.
Hold the reﬂex hammer loosely
between your thumb and index ﬁnger so that it swings freely in an arc
within the limits set by your palm
and other ﬁngers (Fig. 17-45).

FIGURE 17-45.
relaxed swing.

Strike with a brisk

■ With your wrist relaxed, strike the tendon briskly using a rapid wrist move-

ment. Your strike should be quick and direct, not glancing.
Note the speed, force, and amplitude of the reﬂex response and grade the
response using the scale below. Always compare the response of one side
with the other. Reﬂexes are usually graded on a 0 to 4 scale.95
Scale for Grading Reﬂexes
4
3
2
1
0

Very brisk, hyperactive, with clonus (rhythmic oscillations between ﬂexion
and extension)
Brisker than average; possibly but not necessarily indicative of disease
Average; normal
Somewhat diminished; low normal
Reﬂex absent

Hyperactive reflexes (hyperreflexia) are
seen in CNS lesions of the descending
corticospinal tract. Look for associated upper motor neuron findings of
weakness, spasticity, or a positive
Babinski sign.
Hypoactive or absent reflexes (hyporeflexia) occur in lesions of the spinal
nerve roots, spinal nerves, plexuses,
or peripheral nerves. Look for associated findings of lower motor unit disease, namely weakness, atrophy, and
fasciculations.

Reﬂex response depends partly on the force of your strike on the tendon. Use
only enough force to provoke a deﬁnite response. Differences between sides are
usually easier to detect than symmetric changes on both sides. Symmetrically
increased, diminished, or even absent reﬂexes can be normal.
758

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Reinforcement. If the patient’s reﬂexes are symmetrically diminished or
absent, use reinforcement, a technique involving isometric contraction of
other muscles for up to 10 seconds that may increase reﬂex activity. To reinforce
the arm reﬂexes, for example, ask the patient to clench his or her teeth or to
squeeze both knees together. If leg reﬂexes are diminished or absent, ask the
patient to lock ﬁngers and pull one hand against the other. Tell the patient to pull
just before you strike the patellar or Achilles tendon (Fig. 17-46).

F I G U R E 1 7 - 4 6 . Reinforce the quadriceps (patellar) reﬂex.

The Biceps Reﬂex (C5, C6). The patient’s elbow should be partially
ﬂexed and the forearm pronated with palm down. Place your thumb or ﬁnger
ﬁrmly on the biceps tendon. Aim the strike with the reﬂex hammer directly
through your digit toward the biceps tendon (Figs. 17-47 and 17-48).

FIGURE 17-47.
patient sitting.

Biceps reﬂex—

FIGURE 17-48.
patient lying down.

Biceps reﬂex—

Observe ﬂexion at the elbow, and watch for and feel the contraction of the
biceps muscle.
C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

759

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The Triceps Reﬂex (C6, C7). The patient may be sitting or supine. Flex
the patient’s arm at the elbow, with palm toward the body, and pull it slightly
across the chest. Strike the triceps tendon with a direct blow directly behind and
just above the elbow (Figs. 17-49 and 17-50). Watch for contraction of the
triceps muscle and extension at the elbow.

FIGURE 17-50.
patient supine.

Triceps reﬂex—

F I G U R E 1 7 - 4 9 . Triceps
reﬂex—patient sitting.

If you have difﬁculty getting the patient to
relax, try supporting the upper arm. Ask the
patient to let the arm go limp, as if it were
“hung up to dry.” Then strike the triceps tendon (Fig. 17-51).

F I G U R E 1 7 - 5 1 . Triceps
reﬂex—elbow supported.

The Brachioradialis Reﬂex (C5, C6).
The patient’s hand should rest on the abdomen
or the lap, with the forearm partly pronated.
Strike the radius with the point or ﬂat edge of
the reﬂex hammer, about 1 to 2 inches above
the wrist (Fig. 17-52). Watch for ﬂexion and
supination of the forearm.

F I G U R E 1 7 - 5 2 . Brachioradialis
reﬂex.

760

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The Quadriceps (Patellar) Reﬂex (L2, L3, L4). The patient may be
either sitting or lying down as long as the knee is ﬂexed. Briskly tap the patellar
tendon just below the patella (Fig. 17-53). Note contraction of the quadriceps
with extension at the knee. Placing your hand on the patient’s anterior thigh lets
you feel this reﬂex.

FIGURE 17-53.

Quadricepts (patellar) reﬂex.

There are two options for examining the supine patient. Supporting both knees
at once allows you to assess small differences between quadriceps reﬂexes by
repeatedly testing one reﬂex and then the other (Fig. 17-54). If supporting both
legs is uncomfortable for you or the patient, you can place your supporting arm
under the patient’s leg (Fig. 17-55). Some patients ﬁnd it easier to relax with this
method.

F I G U R E 1 7 - 5 4 . Quadriceps
reﬂex—both legs supported.

F I G U R E 1 7 - 5 5 . Quadriceps
reﬂex—one leg supported.

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

761

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

The Achilles (Ankle) Reﬂex (Primarily S1). If the patient is sitting,
partially dorsiﬂex the foot at the ankle. Persuade the patient to relax. Strike the
Achilles tendon, and watch and feel for plantar ﬂexion at the ankle (Fig. 17-56).
Also note the speed of relaxation after muscular contraction.

The slowed relaxation phase of
reflexes in hypothyroidism is often
best detected during the ankle reflex.

FIGURE 17-56.

Achilles reﬂex—patient sitting.

When the patient is lying down, ﬂex one leg at both hip and knee and rotate it
externally so that the lower leg rests across the opposite shin. Then dorsiﬂex the
foot at the ankle and strike the Achilles tendon (Fig. 17-57).

F I G U R E 1 7 - 5 7 . Achilles reﬂex—patient supine.

762

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Clonus. If the reﬂexes seem hyperactive, test for ankle clonus. Support the
knee in a partly ﬂexed position. With your other hand, dorsiﬂex and plantar ﬂex
the foot a few times while encouraging the patient to relax, then sharply dorsiﬂex
the foot and maintain it in dorsiﬂexion (Fig. 17-58). Look and feel for rhythmic
oscillations between dorsiﬂexion and plantar ﬂexion. Normally the ankle does
not react to this stimulus. There may be a few clonic beats if the patient is tense
or has exercised.

Sustained clonus points to CNS disease. The ankle plantar flexes and dorsiflexes repetitively and rhythmically.
Clonus must be present for a reflex to
be graded 4 (see p. 758).

F I G U R E 1 7 - 5 8 . Test for ankle clonus.

Other joints may display clonus. A sharp downward displacement of the patella,
for example, may elicit patellar clonus in the extended knee.

Cutaneous or Superﬁcial Stimulation Reﬂexes
The Abdominal Reﬂexes. Test
the abdominal reﬂexes by lightly but
briskly stroking each side of the
abdomen, above (T8, T9, T10) and
below (T10, T11, T12) the umbilicus in
the directions illustrated (Fig. 17-59).
Use a key, the wooden end of a cottontipped applicator, or a tongue blade
twisted and split longitudinally. Note
the contraction of the abdominal
muscles and movement of the umbilicus
toward the stimulus. If obesity or F I G U R E 1 7 - 5 9 . Test the
previous abdominal surgery masks the abdominal reﬂexes.
abdominal reﬂexes, retract the patient’s umbilicus away from the side being
tested with your ﬁnger and feel for the muscular contraction.

Abdominal reflexes may be absent in
both central and peripheral nerve
disorders.

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

763

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

The Plantar Response (L5, S1). With a key or the wooden end of an
applicator stick, stroke the lateral aspect of the sole from the heel to the ball of
the foot, curving medially across the ball (Fig. 17-60). Use the lightest stimulus
needed to provoke a response, but increase ﬁrmness if necessary. Closely observe
movement of the big toe, normally plantar ﬂexion.

Dorsiflexion of the big toe is a positive
Babinski response (Fig. 17-61), arising
from a CNS lesion affecting the corticospinal tract (sensitivity ∼50%; specificity 99%).96 The Babinski response
can be transiently positive in unconscious states from drug or alcohol
intoxication and during the postictal
period following a seizure.

FIGURE 17-60.

Test the plantar response.

F I G U R E 1 7 - 6 1 . Babinski
response (abnormal).

Some patients withdraw from this stimulus by ﬂexing the hip and the knee. Hold
the ankle, if necessary, to complete your observation. At times it is difﬁcult to
distinguish withdrawal from a Babinski response.

A marked Babinski response is occasionally accompanied by reflex flexion
at hip and knee.

The Anal Reﬂex. Using a broken applicator stick or pinprick, lightly
scratch the anus on both sides. Watch for reﬂex contraction of the external anal
sphincter. Detection of the reﬂex contraction is facilitated by placing a gloved
ﬁnger in the anus during testing.

Loss of the anal reflex suggests a
lesion in the S2–3–4 reflex arc, seen
in cauda equina lesions.

Special Techniques
Meningeal Signs. Test for these important signs whenever you suspect
meningeal inﬂammation from meningitis or subarachnoid hemorrhage.
Neck Mobility/Nuchal Rigidity. First, make sure there is no injury or
fracture to the cervical vertebrae or cervical cord. In trauma settings, this often
requires radiologic evaluation. Then, with the patient supine, place your hands
behind the patient’s head and ﬂex the neck forward, if possible until the chin
764

Inflammation in the subarachnoid
space causes resistance to movement
that stretches the spinal nerves (neck
flexion), the femoral nerve (Brudzinski
sign), and the sciatic nerve (Kernig
sign).

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
touches the chest. Normally the neck is supple, and the patient can easily bend
the head and neck forward.

Neck stiffness with resistance to flexion is found in ∼84% of patients with
acute bacterial meningitis and 21% to
86% of patients with subarachnoid
hemorrhage.97 It is most reliably present in severe meningeal inflammation
but its overall diagnostic accuracy is
low.98

Brudzinski Sign. As you ﬂex the neck, watch the hips and knees in reaction to your maneuver. Normally they should remain relaxed and motionless.

Flexion of both the hips and knees is a
positive Brudzinski sign.

Kernig Sign. Flex the patient’s leg at both the hip and the knee, and then
slowly extend the leg and straighten the knee (Fig. 17-62). Discomfort behind
the knee during full extension is normal but should not produce pain.

Pain and increased resistance to knee
extension are a positive Kernig sign.
The mechanism of this sign is similar
to the positive straight leg raise test.
Irritation or compression of a lumbar
or sacral nerve root or the sciatic
nerve causes radicular or sciatic pain
radiating into the leg when the nerve
is stretched by extending the leg.
The frequency of Brudzinski and
Kernig signs in patients with meningitis has a reported range of 5% to
60%.97 Sensitivity and specificity for
Brudzinski and Kernig signs are
reported as ∼5% and 95% in limited
study sets but are used in emerging
scoring systems and merit more systematic investigation.98,99

FIGURE 17-62.

Test for Kernig sign.

Lumbosacral Radiculopathy: Straight-Leg Raise. If the patient
has low back pain that radiates down the thigh and leg, commonly called sciatica
if in the sciatic nerve distribution, test straight-leg raising on each side in turn.
Place the patient in the supine position. Raise the patient’s relaxed and straightened leg, ﬂexing the thigh at the hip (Fig. 17-63). Some examiners ﬁrst raise the
patient’s leg with the knee ﬂexed, then extend the leg.

See Table 16-3, Low Back Pain, p. 699.
Compression of the spinal nerve root
as it passes through the vertebral
foramen causes a painful radiculopathy with associated muscle weakness
and dermatomal sensory loss, usually
from a herniated disc. More than 95%
of disc herniations occur at L4–L5 or
L5–S1, where the spine angles sharply
posterior. Look for confirming ipsilateral leg wasting or weak ankle dorsiflexion, which make the diagnosis of
sciatica five times more likely.100

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

765

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

FIGURE 17-63.

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Test the straight-leg raise.

Assess the degree of elevation at which pain occurs, the quality and distribution
of the pain, and the effects of foot dorsiﬂexion. Tightness or discomfort in the
buttocks or hamstrings is common during these maneuvers and should not be
interpreted as “radiating pain” or a positive test.

Pain radiating into the ipsilateral leg
is a positive straight leg test for lumbosacral radiculopathy. Foot dorsiflexion
can further increase leg pain in lumbosacral radiculopathy, sciatic neuropathy, or both. Increased pain when the
contralateral healthy leg is raised is a
positive crossed straight-leg raise sign.
These maneuvers stretch the affected
nerve roots and sciatic nerve.

In addition, be sure to examine motor and sensory function and reﬂexes at the
lumbosacral levels.

Sensitivity and specificity of positive
ipsilateral straight leg raise for lumbosacral radiculopathy in patients
with sciatica are relatively low, with
an LR of only 1.5. For the crossed
straight-leg raise the LR is higher,
3.4.100

Asterixis. Asterixis suggests metabolic encephalopathy in patients whose
mental functions are impaired. Asterixis is caused by abnormal function of the
diencephalic motor centers that regulate agonist and antagonist muscle tone and
maintain posture.101

Sudden, brief, nonrhythmic flexion of
the hands and fingers followed by
recovery indicates asterixis, seen in
liver disease, uremia, and hypercapnia.

766

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Ask the patient to “stop trafﬁc” by extending both arms, with hands cocked up
and ﬁngers spread (Fig. 17-64). Watch for 1 to 2 minutes, coaxing the patient as
necessary to maintain this position.

F I G U R E 1 7 - 6 4 . Test for asterixis.

Winging of the Scapula. When the shoulder muscles seem weak or
atrophic, inspect for scapular winging. Ask the patient to extend both arms and
push against your hand or against a wall (Fig. 17-65). Observe the scapulae.
Normally they lie close to the thorax.

In winging, the medial border of the
scapula juts backward (Fig. 17-66),
suspicious for weakness of the trapezius or serratus anterior muscle (seen
in muscular dystrophy), or injury to
the long thoracic nerve.

FIGURE 17-66.
scapular winging.

F I G U R E 1 7 - 6 5 . Test for scapular winging.

Positive

In very thin but normal people, the scapulae may appear “winged” even when
the musculature is intact.
The Stuporous or Comatose Patient. Coma, a state of impaired
arousal and awareness, signals a potentially life-threatening event affecting the
two hemispheres, the brainstem, or both. Accurate assessment is critical.102–107
Although the arousal and awareness functions are interrelated, “a change in one
is not always associated with a similar change in the other.”102 Arousal occurs in
the ascending reticular activating system of the brainstem which projects through
the thalamus to several areas of the cortex, which “processes, integrates, and
gives context to the information provided to it thus generating awareness. Injury

Determining prognosis after coma is
complex and is complicated by use of
therapeutic hypothermia. Research
targets include clinical examination,
EEG patterns, serum biomarkers, and
imaging. Careful neurologic examination remains a mainstay of prognosis,
especially after 72 hours.109,110

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

767

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

to any of these areas or their connections can result in impaired consciousness.”
The usual sequence of history, physical examination, and laboratory evaluation
does not apply. Instead, you must:
■ First assess and stabilize the ABCs (airway, breathing, and circulation)
■ Establish the patient’s level of consciousness

Be familiar with the Glasgow Coma
Scale.108 See Table 17-12, Glasgow
Coma Scale, p. 791.

■ Perform the neurologic examination. Identify any focal or asymmetric ﬁndings

and determine if the cause of impaired consciousness is structural or metabolic.
■ Interview relatives, friends, or witnesses to establish the speed of onset and

duration of unconsciousness, any warning symptoms, precipitating factors, or
previous episodes, and the premorbid appearance and behavior of the patient.
Any history of past medical and psychiatric illnesses is also important.
During your examination, remember two cardinal DON’Ts:
“Don’ts” When Assessing the Comatose Patient
Don’t dilate the pupils, the single most important clue to the underlying cause
of coma (structural vs. metabolic).
● Don’t ﬂex the neck if there is any question of trauma to the head or neck.
Immobilize the cervical spine and get an x-ray ﬁrst to rule out fractures of the
cervical vertebrae that could compress and damage the spinal cord.
●

See Table 17-11, Metabolic and
Structural Coma, p. 790.

Airway, Breathing, and Circulation. Quickly check the patient’s color
and pattern of breathing. Inspect the posterior pharynx and listen over the trachea for stridor to make sure the airway is clear. If respirations are slowed or
shallow, or if the airway is obstructed by secretions, consider intubating the
patient as soon as possible while stabilizing the cervical spine.

Assess the remaining vital signs: pulse, blood pressure, and rectal temperature.
If hypotension or hemorrhage is present, establish intravenous access and begin
intravenous ﬂuids. (Further emergency management and laboratory studies are
beyond the scope of this text.)
Level of Consciousness. Level of consciousness primarily reﬂects the
patient’s capacity for arousal, or wakefulness. Testing targets the level of activity that
the patient can be aroused to perform in response to escalating stimulation by the
examiner.

Five clinical levels of consciousness are listed in the table below, with related
techniques for examination. Increase your stimuli in a stepwise manner, depending on the patient’s response. When you examine patients with an altered level
of consciousness, describe and record exactly what you see and hear. Imprecise
use of terms such as lethargy, obtundation, stupor, or coma may mislead other
examiners.

768

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

Level of Consciousness (Arousal): Techniques
and Patient Response
Level

Technique

Patient Response

Alertness

Speak to the patient in a
normal tone of voice.

Lethargy

Speak to the patient in a
loud voice. For example,
call the patient’s name
or ask “How are you?”
Shake the patient gently
as if awakening a
sleeper.

The alert patient opens the eyes,
looks at you, and responds fully
and appropriately to stimuli
(arousal intact).
The patient appears drowsy but
opens the eyes and looks at you,
responds to questions, and then
falls asleep.
The obtunded patient opens the
eyes and looks at you but
responds slowly and is somewhat
confused. Alertness and interest
in the environment are decreased.
The stuporous patient arouses from
sleep only after painful stimuli. Verbal responses are slow or even
absent. The patient lapses into an
unresponsive state when the stimulus ceases. There is minimal awareness of self or the environment.
A comatose patient remains
unarousable with eyes closed.
There is no evident response to
inner need or external stimuli.

Obtundation

Stupor

Coma

Apply a painful stimulus.
For example, pinch a
tendon, rub the sternum, or roll a pencil
across a nail bed. (No
stronger stimuli
needed!)
Apply repeated painful
stimuli.

Neurologic Evaluation
Respirations. Observe the rate, rhythm, and pattern of respiration. Because
neural structures that govern breathing in the cortex and brainstem overlap
with those that govern consciousness, abnormalities of respiration often occur
in coma.

See Table 17-11, Metabolic and Structural Coma, p. 790, and Table 8-4
Abnormalities in Rate and Rhythm of
Breathing, p. 335.

Pupils. Observe the size and equality of the pupils and test their reaction
to light. The presence or absence of the light reaction is one of the most important signs distinguishing structural from metabolic causes of coma. The light
reaction often remains intact in metabolic coma.

See Table 17-13, Pupils in Comatose
Patients, p. 792.

Ocular Movement. Observe the position of the eyes and eyelids at rest.
Check for horizontal deviation of the eyes to one side (gaze preference). When
the oculomotor pathways are intact, the eyes look straight ahead.

In structural hemispheric lesions, the
eyes “look at the lesion” in the affected
hemisphere.

Structural lesions from stroke,
abscess, or tumor mass may lead to
asymmetrical pupils and loss of the
light reaction.

In irritative lesions from epilepsy or a
unilateral pontine lesion, the eyes “look
away” from the affected hemisphere.

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

769

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Oculocephalic Reflex (Doll’s Eye Movements). This reﬂex helps assess brainstem

function in the comatose patient. Holding
the upper eyelids open so that you can see
the eyes, turn the head quickly, ﬁrst to one
side and then to the other (Fig. 17-67).
Make sure the patient has no neck injury
before performing this test.

FIGURE 17-67.
oculocephalic reﬂex.

Test the

In a comatose patient with absent
doll’s eye movements, the ability to
move both eyes to one side is lost,
suspicious for a lesion of the midbrain
or pons (Fig. 17-69).

In a comatose patient with an intact brainstem, as the head is turned in one direction,
the eyes move toward the opposite side (the
doll’s eye movements). In Figure 17-68, for
example, the patient’s head has been turned
to the right; her eyes have moved to the left.
Her eyes still seem to gaze at the camera.
The doll’s eye movements are intact.

F I G U R E 1 7 - 6 8 . Oculocephalic
reﬂex intact.

FIGURE 17-69.
reﬂex absent.

Oculocephalic

Oculovestibular Reflex (with Caloric Stimulation). If the oculocephalic reﬂex
is absent and you seek further testing of brainstem function, test the oculovestibular reﬂex. Note that this test is usually not performed in an awake patient.

Make sure the eardrums are intact and the ear canals clear. Elevate the patient’s
head to 30° to perform the test accurately. Place a kidney basin under the ear to
catch any water that spills over. With a large syringe, inject ice water through a
small catheter that is lying in (but not plugging) the ear canal. Watch for deviation of the eyes in the horizontal plane. You may need to use up to 120 mL of ice
water to elicit a response. In the comatose patient with an intact brainstem, the
eyes drift toward the irrigated ear. Repeat on the opposite side, waiting 3 to
5 minutes if necessary for the ﬁrst response to disappear.
Posture and Muscle Tone. Observe the patient’s posture. If there is no
spontaneous movement, you may need to apply a painful stimulus (see p. 769).
Classify the resulting pattern of movement as:
■ Normal–avoidant—the patient purposefully pushes the stimulus away or

No response to stimulation indicates
brainstem injury.

See Table 17-14, Abnormal Postures in
Comatose Patients, p. 793. Two stereotypic responses predominate: decorticate rigidity and decerebrate rigidity.

withdraws.
■ Stereotypic—the stimulus evokes abnormal postural responses of the trunk

and extremities.

No response on one side suggests a
corticospinal tract lesion.

■ Flaccid paralysis or no response

770

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Test muscle tone by grasping each forearm near the wrist and raising it to a vertical position. Note the position of the
hand, which is usually only slightly
ﬂexed at the wrist (Fig. 17-70).

FIGURE 17-70.
in the arm.

Test muscle tone

FIGURE 17-71.
ﬂaccid.

Arm tone

The hemiplegia of acute cerebral
infarction is usually flaccid at first. The
limp hand drops to form a right angle
with the wrist (Fig. 17-71).

Then lower the arm to about 12 or 18 inches off the bed and drop it. Watch how
it falls. A normal arm drops somewhat slowly.

A flaccid arm drops rapidly, like a rock.

Support the patient’s ﬂexed knees. Then extend one leg at a time at the knee and
let the leg fall (Fig. 17-72). Compare the speed with which each leg falls.

In acute hemiplegia, the flaccid leg
falls more rapidly.

FIGURE 17-72.

Test muscle tone in the leg.

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

771

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Flex both legs so that the heels rest on the bed and then release them. The normal
leg returns slowly to its original extended position.

In acute hemiplegia, the weak leg falls
rapidly into extension, with external
rotation at the hip.

Further Examination. As you complete the neurologic examination, check
for facial asymmetry and asymmetries in motor, sensory, and reﬂex function. Test
for meningeal signs if indicated.

Meningeal signs are suspicious for
meningitis or subarachnoid hemorrhage.11,12

As you proceed to the general physical examination, include the following assessments.
■ Check for unusual odors.

Consider alcohol, liver failure, or uremia.

■ Inspect for abnormalities of the skin, including color, moisture, evidence of

Note any jaundice, cyanosis, or the
cherry red color of carbon monoxide
poisoning.

bleeding disorders, needle marks, and other lesions.

■ Inspect and palpate the scalp and skull for signs of trauma.

Look for bruises, lacerations, or swelling.

■ Examine the fundi carefully.

Examine closely for hypertensive retinopathy and papilledema, an important sign
of elevated intracranial pressure.

■ Test the corneal reﬂexes to make sure they are intact. Remember that contact

Corneal reflex loss occurs in coma and
lesions affecting CN V or CN VII.

lenses may abolish these reﬂexes.
■ Inspect the ears and nose, and examine the mouth and throat.

■ Be sure to evaluate the heart, lungs, and abdomen.

772

Blood or cerebrospinal fluid in the nose
or the ears suggests a skull fracture; otitis
media suggests a possible brain abscess.
Tongue injury suggests a seizure.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS

Recording Your Findings
Note that initially you may use sentences to describe your ﬁndings; later you
will use phrases. The style below contains phrases appropriate for most writeups. Note the ﬁve components of the examination and write-up of the nervous
system.
Recording the Examination—The Nervous System
“Mental Status: Alert, relaxed, and cooperative. Thought process coherent. Oriented to person, place, and time. Detailed cognitive testing deferred. Cranial
Nerves: I—not tested; II through XII intact. Motor: Good muscle bulk and
tone. Strength 5/5 throughout. Cerebellar—Rapid alternating movements
(RAMs), ﬁnger-to-nose (F→N), heel-to-shin (H→S) intact. Gait with normal
base. Romberg—maintains balance with eyes closed. No pronator drift.
Sensory: Pinprick, light touch, position, and vibration intact. Reﬂexes: 2 and
symmetric with plantar reﬂexes downgoing.”
OR
“Mental Status: The patient is alert and tries to answer questions but has diﬃculty
ﬁnding words. Cranial Nerves: I—not tested; II—visual acuity intact; visual ﬁelds
full; III, IV, VI—extraocular movements intact; V motor—temporal and masseter
strength intact, corneal reﬂexes present; VII motor—prominent right facial
droop and ﬂattening of right nasolabial fold, left facial movements intact, sensory—taste not tested; VIII—hearing intact bilaterally to whispered voice; IX,
X—gag intact; XI—strength of sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles 5/5;
XII—tongue midline. Motor: strength in right biceps, triceps, iliopsoas, gluteals,
quadriceps, hamstring, and ankle ﬂexor and extensor muscles 3/5 with good
bulk but increased tone and spasticity; strength in comparable muscle groups
on the left 5/5 with good bulk and tone. Gait—unable to test. Cerebellar—
unable to test on right due to right arm and leg weakness; RAMs, F→N, H→S
intact on left. Romberg—unable to test due to right leg weakness. Right pronator drift present. Sensory: decreased sensation to pinprick over right face, arm,
and leg; intact on the left. Stereognosis and two-point discrimination not
tested. Reﬂexes (can record in two ways):

RT
LT

Biceps

Triceps

Brach

Knee

Ankle Plantar

++++
++

++++
++

++++
++

++++
++

++++
+

4+
4+
4+
OR

These findings are suspicious for left
hemispheric cerebral infarction in the
distribution of the left middle cerebral
artery, with right-sided hemiparesis.

2+
2+
2+

4+
4+

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

773

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 17-1 Disorders
of the Central and Peripheral
Nervous Systems

Central Nervous System Disorders
Knee

Hip
Trunk
Hand
(1)
Face

Thalamus

Tongue

(4)
Basal
ganglia

Internal
capsule

MIDBRAIN

Corticospinal tracts

Corticobulbar tract

(2)

LOWER MEDULLA

Pyramids
SPINAL CORD
(3)

Lateral corticospinal
tract

Anterior corticospinal
tract

Typical Findings
Location of
Lesion

Deep Tendon
Reﬂexes

Examples
of Cause

Contralateral sensory loss in
the face, limbs, and trunk
on the same side as the
motor deﬁcits

↑

Cortical stroke

Variable; no typical sensory
ﬁndings

↑

Brainstem
stroke, acoustic
neuroma

Motor

Sensory

Cerebral
Cortex (1)

Chronic contralateral
corticospinal-type weakness and
spasticity; ﬂexion is stronger than
extension in the arm, plantar
ﬂexion is stronger than
dorsiﬂexion in the foot, and the
leg is externally rotated at the hip

Brainstem (2)

Weakness and spasticity as above,
plus CN deﬁcits such as diplopia
(from weakness of the extraocular
muscles) and dysarthria

774

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Typical Findings
Location of
Lesion

Deep Tendon
Reﬂexes

Examples
of Cause

↑

Trauma, spinal
cord tumor

Motor

Sensory

Spinal Cord (3)

Weakness and spasticity as above,
but often affecting both sides (when
cord damage is bilateral), causing
paraparesis or quadriparesis
depending on the level of injury

Dermatomal sensory deﬁcit on
the trunk on one or both sides
at the level of the lesion, and
sensory loss from tract damage
below the level of the lesion

Subcortical Gray
Matter: Basal
Ganglia (4)

Slowness of movement
(bradykinesia), rigidity, and
tremor

Sensation not affected

Normal or ↓

Parkinsonism

Cerebellar (not
illustrated)

Hypotonia, ataxia, nystagmus,
dysdiadochokinesis, and dysmetria

Sensation not affected

Normal or ↓

Cerebellar stroke,
brain tumor

Peripheral Nervous System Disorders
Posterior horn

Posterior root

Posterior root
ganglion
Spinal
nerve
Afferent
sensory
fiber

(1)

(2)
(3)

(5)

(4)

Efferent
motor fiber
Anterior
horn

Anterior
horn cell

(6)

Anterior root
Muscle

Anterior Horn
Cell (1)

Weakness and atrophy in a
segmental or focal pattern;
fasciculations

Sensation intact

↓

Polio,
amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis

Spinal Roots and
Nerves (2)

Weakness and atrophy in a rootinnervated pattern; sometimes
with fasciculations

Corresponding dermatomal
sensory deﬁcits

↓

Herniated cervical
or lumbar disc

Peripheral Nerve—
Mononeuropathy
(3)

Weakness and atrophy in a
peripheral nerve distribution;
sometimes with fasciculations

Sensory loss in the pattern
of that nerve

↓

Trauma

Peripheral Nerve—
Polyneuropathy
(4)

Weakness and atrophy more
distal than proximal; sometimes
with fasciculations

Sensory deﬁcits, commonly
in stocking-glove
distribution

↓

Peripheral polyneuropathy of alcoholism, diabetes

Neuromuscular
Junction (5)

Fatigability more than weakness

Sensation intact

Normal

Myasthenia gravis

Muscle (6)

Weakness usually more proximal
than distal; fasciculations rare

Sensation intact

Normal or ↓

Muscular
dystrophy

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

775

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 17-2 Types of Stroke

Assessment of stroke requires careful history taking and a detailed physical examination, and should focus on three fundamental questions: What brain area and related vascular territory explain the patient’s ﬁndings? Is the stroke ischemic or
hemorrhagic? If ischemic, is the mechanism thrombosis or embolus? Stroke is a medical emergency, and timing is of the essence.
Answers to these questions are critical to patient outcomes and use of antithrombotic therapies.
In acute ischemic stroke, ischemic brain injury begins with a central core of very low perfusion and often irreversible cell death.
This core is surrounded by an ischemic penumbra of metabolically disturbed cells that are still potentially viable, depending on
the restoration of blood ﬂow and duration of ischemia. Because most irreversible damage occurs in the ﬁrst 3–6 hrs after onset
of symptoms, therapies targeted to the 3-hr window achieve the best outcomes, with recovery in up to 50% of patients in some
studies.
Clinician performance in diagnosing stroke improves with training and experience. Understanding the pathophysiology of
stroke takes dedication, expert supervision to improve techniques of neurologic examination, and perseverance. This brief
overview is intended to prompt further study and practice. Accuracy in clinical examination is achievable, and more important than
ever in determining patient therapy.25,27,28,59 Turn to pp. 728–731 and review the discussion of stroke risk factors—primary and
secondary prevention.

Clinical Features and Vascular Territories of Stroke
Clinical Finding

Vascular Territory

Additional Comments

Contralateral leg weakness

Anterior circulation—anterior cerebral
artery (ACA)

Includes stem of circle of Willis
connecting internal carotid artery to
ACA, and the segment distal to ACA
and its anterior choroidal branch

Contralateral face, arm > leg weakness,
sensory loss, visual ﬁeld loss, apraxia,
aphasia (left MCA), or neglect (right
MCA)

Anterior circulation—middle cerebral
artery (MCA)

Largest vascular bed for stroke

Contralateral motor or sensory deﬁcit
without cortical signs

Subcortical circulationa—lenticulostriate
deep penetrating branches of MCA

Small vessel subcortical lacunar infarcts
in internal capsule, thalamus, or
brainstem; ﬁve classical syndromes are
seen: pure motor stroke (hemiplegia/
hemiparesis), pure sensory stroke
(hemianesthesia), ataxic hemiparesis,
clumsy-hand/dysarthria syndrome, and
mixed sensorimotor stroke

Contralateral visual ﬁeld loss

Posterior circulation—posterior cerebral
artery (PCA)

Includes paired vertebral and basilar
artery, paired PCAs. Bilateral PCA
infarction causes cortical blindness but
preserved pupillary light reaction.

Dysphagia, dysarthria, tongue/palate
deviation, and/or ataxia with crossed
sensory/motor deﬁcits ( = ipsilateral face
with contralateral body)

Posterior circulation—brainstem,
vertebral, or basilar artery branches

Oculomotor deﬁcits and/or ataxia with
crossed sensory/motor deﬁcits

Posterior circulation—basilar artery

Complete basilar artery occlusion—
“locked-in syndrome” with intact
consciousness but with inability to
speak and quadriplegia

a

Learn to differentiate cortical from subcortical involvement. Subcortical or lacunar syndromes do not affect higher cognitive function, language, or visual ﬁelds.

Source: Adapted with permission from Medical Knowledge Self-Assessment Program, 14th edition (MKSAP 14), Neurology. Philadelphia, PA: American College of
Physicians; 2006. Copyright 2006, American College of Physicians.

776

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Anterior cerebral
artery

Lateral
ventrical

Anterior choroidal
artery

Body of
caudate
Internal
capsule

Middle cerebral
artery
Posterior cerebral
artery

Putamen
Thalamus
Globus
pallidus

Uncus

Prefrontal area

Motor speech
(Broca's) area

Taste area

Sensory speech
(Wernicke) area

Premotor area

Primary somatic
sensory cortex

Primary
auditory cortex

Reading comprehension area

Primary motor
cortex

Somatic sensory
association area

Auditory
association area

Visual association
area
Visual cortex

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

777

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 17-3 Syncope and Similar Disorders Problem
Mechanism

Precipitating Factors

Vasovagal Syncope (The Common Faint)
and Vasodepressor Syncope

For vasovagal syncope: reﬂex withdrawal of sympathetic
tone and increased vagal tone causing drop in blood
pressure and heart rate
For vasodepressor syncope: same mechanism but no
vagal surge or drop in heart rate
Baroreﬂexes normal

Strong emotion such as fear or
pain, prolonged standing, hot
humid environment

Orthostatic Hypotension (drop in
systolic blood pressure of ≥20 mm Hg or in
diastolic blood pressure of ≥10 mm Hg within
3 min of standing)37,111–113

Gravitationally mediated redistribution and pooling of
300–800 mL blood in the lower extremities and
splanchnic venous system, caused by decreased venous
return and an excessive fall in cardiac output, or by an
inadequate vasoconstrictor mechanism (with inadequate
release of norepinephrine)

Standing up

Hypovolemia, a diminished blood volume insufﬁcient to
maintain cardiac output and blood pressure

Standing up after hemorrhage or
dehydration

Cough Syncope

Neurally mediated, possibly from reﬂex vasodepressorbradycardia response; cerebral hypoperfusion,
increased CSF pressure also proposed

Severe paroxysm of coughing

Micturition Syncope

Vasovagal response, sudden hypotension proposed

Emptying the bladder after
getting out of bed to void

Arrhythmias

Decreased cardiac output from cardiac ischemia, ventricular arrhythmias, prolonged QT syndrome, persistent bradycardia, infrafascicular block causing cerebral
hypoperfusion; often sudden onset, sudden offset

Sudden change in rhythm to
bradycardia or tachyarrhythmia

Aortic Stenosis and Hypertrophic
Cardiomyopathy
Myocardial Infarction

Vascular resistance falls with exercise, but cardiac
output does not rise due to outﬂow obstruction.

Exercise

Sudden arrhythmia or decreased cardiac output

Variable, often exertion

Massive Pulmonary Embolism

Sudden hypoxia or decreased cardiac output

Variable, including prolonged bed
rest, major surgery, clotting
disorders, pregnancy

Hypocapnia due to Hyperventilation

Constriction of cerebral blood vessels from hypocapnia
induced by hyperventilation

Anxiety, panic disorder

Hypoglycemia

Insufﬁcient glucose to maintain cerebral metabolism;
epinephrine release contributes to symptoms; true
syncope is uncommon

Variable, including fasting

Fainting from Conversion Disorder

The symbolic expression of an unacceptable idea
through behavior; skin color, vital signs may be
normal; sometimes with bizarre purposeful
movements; usually occurs when other people
present

Stress or trauma, psychological or
physical

Cardiovascular Disorders111,114

Disorders Resembling Syncope

(Termed “Functional Neurologic Symptom
Disorder” in DSM-5)

778

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Prodromal
Manifestations

Postural
Associations

Fatigue, hunger, preload reduction from
dehydration, diuretics, vasodilators

Usually >10 s. Palpitations,
nausea, blurred vision, warmth,
pallor, diaphoresis, lightheadedness

Usually occurs when
standing, at times
when sitting

Prompt return of consciousness
after lying down, but pallor,
weakness, nausea, and slight
confusion may persist for a
time
Most common type of syncope

Aging; central and peripheral neuropathies:
Parkinson disease, multiple system atrophy;
Lewy body disease diabetes, amyloidosis;
antihypertensive vasodilator drugs; prolonged
bed rest

Lightheadedness, dizziness,
cognitive slowing, fatigue

Occurs soon after
standing

Prompt return to normal when
lying down

Often none

Supine hypertension
is common

Bleeding from the GI tract or trauma, potent
diuretics, vomiting, diarrhea, polyuria

Occurs soon after
standing up

Improves with volume repletion

COPD, asthma, pulmonary hypertension.
Typically occurs in overweight middle-aged
patients.

Light-headedness and
palpitations (tachycardia) on
standing up
Often none except for cough;
blurred vision, light-headedness
may occur

May occur in any
position

Prompt return to normal after a
few seconds

Nocturia, usually in elderly or adult men

Often none

Commonly just after
(or during) voiding
after standing up

Prompt return to normal

Ischemic or valvular heart disease; conduction abnormalities; pericardial disease;
cardiomyopathy
Aging decreases tolerance of abnormal
rhythms.
Cardiac disorders

Palpitations, usually lasting <5 s.
Often none

May occur in any
position

Chest pain, often none; onset is
sudden

Occurs with or after
exercise

Prompt return to normal when
arrhythmia resolves.
Most common cause of cardiac
syncope. Cardiogenic syncope
has a 6-mo mortality >10%
Usually a prompt return to
normal

Coronary artery disease, coronary ischemia or
vasospasm
Deep vein thrombosis, bed rest, hypercoagulable
states (systemic lupus erythematosus, cancer),
protein S or C deﬁciency antithrombin III
deﬁciency. Estrogen therapy

Ischemic chest pain; may be
silent
Tachypnea, chest or pleuritic
pain, dyspnea, anxiety, cough

May occur in any
position
May occur in any
position

Variable; related to time to
diagnosis and treatment
Related to time to diagnosis and
treatment

Anxiety

Dyspnea, palpitations, chest
discomfort, numbness, and
tingling in hands and around
the mouth lasting several
minutes; consciousness is often
maintained

May occur in any
position

Slow improvement as
hyperventilation ceases

Insulin therapy and a variety of metabolic
disorders

Sweating, tremors, palpitations,
hunger, headache, confusion,
abnormal behavior, coma

May occur in any
position

Variable, depending on severity
and treatment

History of multiple somatic symptoms
Often dissociative symptoms such as
depersonalization, derealization, dissociative
amnesia, or maladaptive personality traits
Associated with past child abuse or neglect

Variable

A slump to the ﬂoor,
often from a standing
position, without
injury

Variable; may be prolonged,
often with ﬂuctuating
responsiveness and inconsistent
neurologic ﬁndings

Predisposing Factors

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Recovery

| The Nervous System

779

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 17-4 Seizure Disorders

Seizures were reclassiﬁed in 2010 as focal or generalized to better reﬂect current medical science. Underlying causes should be
identiﬁed as genetic, structural/metabolic, or unknown. The complexities of the reclassiﬁcation scheme are best explored by
turning to the report of the International League Against Epilepsy (ILAE) Commission on Classiﬁcation and Terminology,
2005–2009 and to more detailed references. This table presents only basic concepts from the ILAE report.

Focal Seizures
Focal seizures “are conceptualized as originating within networks limited to one hemisphere.
■ They may be discretely localized or more widely distributed.
■ Focal seizures may originate in subcortical structures.
■ For each seizure type, ictal onset is consistent from one seizure to another, with preferential propagation patterns that can
involve the contralateral hemisphere. In some cases, however, there is more than one network, and more than one seizure
type, but each individual seizure type has a consistent site of onset.
■ Focal seizures do not fall into any recognized set of natural causes.”
The distinction between simple partial and partial complex is eliminated, but clinicians are urged to recognize and describe
“impairment of consciousness/awareness or other dyscognitive features, localization, and progression of ictal events.”

Type

Clinical Manifestations

Postictal State

Focal Seizures without
Impairment of
Consciousness
With observable motor and
autonomic symptoms
■

Jacksonian

Tonic then clonic movements that start unilaterally in
the hand, foot, or face and spread to other body parts
on the same side

Normal consciousness

■

Other motor

Turning of the head and eyes to one side, or tonic and
clonic movements of an arm or leg without the
Jacksonian spread

Normal consciousness

■

With autonomic symptoms

A “funny feeling” in the epigastrium, nausea, pallor,
ﬂushing, lightheadedness

Normal consciousness

Numbness, tingling; simple visual, auditory, or
olfactory hallucinations such as ﬂashing lights,
buzzing, or odors

Normal consciousness

Anxiety or fear; feelings of familiarity (déjà vu) or
unreality; dreamy states; fear or rage; ﬂashback
experiences; more complex hallucinations
The seizure may or may not start with the autonomic
or psychic symptoms outlined above; consciousness is
impaired, and the person appears confused
Automatisms include automatic motor behaviors such
as chewing, smacking the lips, walking about, and
unbuttoning clothes; also more complicated and
skilled behaviors such as driving a car
Partial seizures that become generalized resemble
tonic–clonic seizures (see next page); the patient may
not recall the focal onset

Normal consciousness

With subjective sensory or
psychic phenomena

Focal Seizures with
Impairment of
Consciousness

Focal Seizures That
Become Generalized

780

The patient may remember initial
autonomic or psychic symptoms
(which are then termed an aura),
but is amnesic for the rest of the
seizure. Temporary confusion and
headache may occur
As in a tonic–clonic seizure,
described on the next page; two
attributes indicate a partial seizure
that has become generalized:
(1) the recollection of an aura, and
(2) a unilateral neurologic deﬁcit
during the postictal period

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Generalized Seizures and Pseudoseizures
Generalized seizures “are conceptualized as originating at some point within, and rapidly engaging, bilaterally distributed
networks . . . that include cortical and subcortical structures, but do not necessarily include the entire cortex . . .”
The location and lateralization are not consistent from one seizure to another.
Generalized seizures can be asymmetric.
■ They may begin with body movements, impaired consciousness, or both.
■ If onset of tonic–clonic seizures begins after age 30 yrs, suspect either a partial seizure that has become generalized or a
generalized seizure caused by a toxic or metabolic disorder.
■
■

Toxic and metabolic causes include withdrawal from alcohol or other sedative drugs, uremia, hypoglycemia, hyperglycemia,
hyponatremia, drug toxicity, and bacterial meningitis.

Problem
Generalized Seizures
Tonic–Clonic (Grand Mal)a

Postictal (Postseizure)
State

Clinical Manifestations
The patient loses consciousness suddenly, sometimes
with a cry, and the body stiffens into tonic extensor
rigidity. Breathing stops, and the patient becomes
cyanotic. A clonic phase of rhythmic muscular
contraction follows. Breathing resumes and is often
noisy, with excessive salivation. Injury, tongue biting,
and urinary incontinence may occur.

Confusion, drowsiness, fatigue,
headache, muscular aching, and
sometimes the temporary
persistence of bilateral neurologic
deﬁcits such as hyperactive reﬂexes
and Babinski responses. The
patient is amnestic about the
seizure and aura.

Absence

A sudden brief lapse of consciousness, with
momentary blinking, staring, or movements of the lips
and hands but no falling. Two subtypes are: typical
absence—lasts <10 s and stops abruptly; atypical
absence—may last >10 s.

No aura recalled. In typical
absence, a prompt return to
normal; in atypical absence, some
postictal confusion

Myoclonic

Sudden, brief, rapid jerks, involving the trunk or
limbs. Associated with a variety of disorders.

Variable.

Myoclonic Atonic
(Drop Attack)

Sudden loss of consciousness with falling but no
movements. Injury may occur.

Either a prompt return to normal
or a brief period of confusion.

Pseudoseizures
May mimic seizures but are
due to a conversion disorder
(termed “Functional Neurologic
Symptom Disorder” in DSM-5).

The movements may have personally symbolic
signiﬁcance and often do not follow a neuroanatomic
pattern. Injury is uncommon.

Variable.

a

Febrile convulsions that resemble brief tonic–clonic seizures occur in infants and young children. They are usually benign but may also be the ﬁrst manifestation of
a seizure disorder.
Source: Commission on Classiﬁcation and Terminology of the International League Against Epilepsy (Berg AT, Berkovic SF, Brodie MJ, et al.). A proposed
diagnostic scheme for people with epileptic seizures and with epilepsy: report of the ILAE Task Force on Classiﬁcation and Terminology, 2005–2009. Epilepsia.
2010;51:676. Available at http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1528-1167.2010.02522.x/full. Accessed July 31, 2015.

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

781

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 17-5 Tremors and Involuntary Movements
Tremors
Tremors are rhythmic oscillatory movements, which may be roughly subdivided into three groups: resting (or static) tremors,
postural tremors, and intention tremors.

Resting (Static) Tremors
These tremors are most prominent at rest
and may decrease or disappear with
voluntary movement. Illustrated is the
common relatively slow, ﬁne pill-rolling
tremor of parkinsonism, about 5 per
second.

Postural Tremors
These tremors appear when the affected
part is actively maintaining a posture.
Examples include the ﬁne rapid tremor
of hyperthyroidism, the tremors of anxiety and fatigue, and benign essential
(and often familial) tremor.

Intention Tremors
Intention tremors, absent at rest, appear
with movement and often get worse as
the target gets closer. Causes include
cerebellar disorders such as multiple
sclerosis.

Involuntary Movements

Oral–Facial Dyskinesias
Oral–facial dyskinesias are arrhythmic, repetitive, bizarre movements that chieﬂy
involve the face, mouth, jaw, and tongue: grimacing, pursing of the lips, protrusions
of the tongue, opening and closing of the mouth, and deviations of the jaw. The limbs
and trunk are involved less often. These movements may be a late complication of
psychotropic drugs such as phenothiazines, termed tardive (late) dyskinesias. They
also occur in long-standing psychoses, in some elderly individuals, and in some
edentulous persons.

782

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Tics
Tics are brief, repetitive, stereotyped, coordinated movements
occurring at irregular intervals. Examples include repetitive
winking, grimacing, and shoulder shrugging. Causes include
Tourette syndrome and late effects of drugs such as
phenothiazines.

Dystonia
Dystonic movements are similar to athetoid movements, but
often involve larger parts of the body, including the trunk.
Grotesque, twisted postures may result. Causes include drugs
such as phenothiazines, primary torsion dystonia, and as
illustrated, spasmodic torticollis.

Athetosis
Athetoid movements are slower and more twisting and
writhing than choreiform movements, and have a larger
amplitude. They most commonly involve the face and the
distal extremities. Athetosis is often associated with spasticity.
Causes include cerebral palsy.

Chorea
Choreiform movements are brief, rapid, jerky, irregular, and
unpredictable. They occur at rest or interrupt normal
coordinated movements. Unlike tics, they seldom repeat
themselves. The face, head, lower arms, and hands are often
involved. Causes include Sydenham chorea (with rheumatic
fever) and Huntington disease.

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

783

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 17-6 Disorders of Speech

Disorders of speech fall into three groups affecting: (1) phonation of the voice, (2) the articulation of words, and (3) the
production and comprehension of language.
■ Aphonia refers to a loss of voice that accompanies disease affecting the larynx or its nerve supply. Dysphonia refers to less severe
impairment in the volume, quality, or pitch of the voice. For example, a person may be hoarse or only able to speak in a
whisper. Causes include laryngitis, laryngeal tumors, and unilateral vocal cord paralysis (CN X).
■ Dysarthria refers to a defect in the muscular control of the speech apparatus (lips, tongue, palate, or pharynx). Words may be
nasal, slurred, or indistinct, but the central symbolic aspect of language remains intact. Causes include motor lesions of the
CNS or PNS, parkinsonism, and cerebellar disease.
■ Aphasia refers to a disorder in producing or understanding language. It is often caused by lesions in the dominant cerebral
hemisphere, usually the left.
Compared below are two common types of aphasia: (1) Wernicke, a ﬂuent (receptive) aphasia, and (2) Broca, a nonﬂuent
(or expressive) aphasia. There are other less common kinds of aphasia, which are distinguished by differing responses on the
speciﬁc tests listed. Neurologic consultation is usually indicated.

Wernicke Aphasia

Broca Aphasia

Qualities of Spontaneous
Speech

Fluent; often rapid, voluble, and effortless.
Inﬂection and articulation are good, but
sentences lack meaning and words are
malformed (paraphasias) or invented
(neologisms). Speech may be totally
incomprehensible.

Nonﬂuent; slow, with few words and
laborious effort. Inﬂection and articulation
are impaired but words are meaningful, with
nouns, transitive verbs, and important
adjectives. Small grammatical words are
often dropped.

Word Comprehension

Impaired

Fair to good

Repetition

Impaired

Impaired

Naming

Impaired

Impaired, though the patient recognizes
objects

Reading Comprehension

Impaired

Fair to good

Writing

Impaired

Impaired

Location of Lesion

Posterior superior temporal lobe

Posterior inferior frontal lobe

Although it is important to recognize aphasia early in your encounter with a patient, integrate this information with your
neurologic examination as you generate your differential diagnosis.

784

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 17-7 Nystagmus

Nystagmus is a rhythmic oscillation of the eyes, analogous to a tremor in other parts of the body. It has multiple causes,
including impairment of vision in early life, disorders of the labyrinth and the cerebellar system, and drug toxicity. Nystagmus
occurs normally when a person watches a rapidly moving object (e.g., a passing train). Study the three characteristics of
nystagmus described in this table so that you can correctly identify the type of nystagmus. Then refer to textbooks of neurology
for differential diagnoses.

Direction of Gaze in Which Nystagmus Appears
Example: Nystagmus on Right Lateral Gaze
Nystagmus Present (Right Lateral Gaze)
Although nystagmus may be present in all
directions of gaze, it may appear or become
accentuated only on deviation of the eyes (e.g.,
to the side or upward). On extreme lateral
gaze, the normal person may show a few beats
resembling nystagmus. Avoid making
assessments in such extreme positions, and
observe for nystagmus only within the ﬁeld of full
binocular vision.
Nystagmus Not Present (Left Lateral Gaze)

Direction of the Quick and Slow Phases
Example: Left-Beating Nystagmus—a Quick Jerk to the Left in
Each Eye, then a Slow Drift to the Right
Nystagmus usually has both slow and fast
movements, but is deﬁned by its fast phase.
For example, if the eyes jerk quickly to the
patient’s left and drift back slowly to the right,
the patient is said to have left-beating
nystagmus. Occasionally, nystagmus consists
only of coarse oscillations without quick and
slow components, described as pendular.
(continued)

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

785

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 17-7 Nystagmus (Continued )
Plane of the Movements
Horizontal Nystagmus

The movement of nystagmus may occur in one
or more planes, namely horizontal, vertical, or
rotary. It is the plane of the movements, not
the direction of the gaze, that deﬁnes this
variable.

Vertical Nystagmus

Rotary Nystagmus

786

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 17-8 Types of Facial Paralysis

Facial weakness or paralysis may result from either (1) a peripheral lesion of CN VII, the facial nerve, anywhere from its origin
in the pons to its periphery in the face, or (2) a central lesion involving the upper motor neuron system between the cortex and
the pons. A peripheral lesion of CN VII, exempliﬁed here by a Bell palsy, is compared with a central lesion, exempliﬁed by a left
hemispheric cerebral infarction. These can be distinguished by their different effects on the upper portion of the face.
The lower portion of the face is normally controlled by upper motor neurons located on only one side of the cortex—the
opposite side. Left hemispheric damage to these pathways, as in stroke, weakens the right lower face. The upper face, however, is
controlled by pathways from both sides of the cortex. Even though the upper motor neurons on the left are destroyed, others on
the right remain, and the right upper face continues to function fairly well.

CN VII—Peripheral Lesion

CN VII—Central Lesion

Peripheral nerve damage to CN VII paralyzes the entire right
side of the face, including the forehead.

Central nerve damage to CN VII paralyzes the lower face but
cortical innervation to the forehead is preserved.
Motor cortex

Motor cortex

CN VII
central
lesion
CN VII
peripheral
lesion

Synapses in
the pons

Synapses in
the pons

Facial nerve

Facial nerve

Closing Eyes

Closing Eyes

Eye does
not close;
eyeball rolls up

Eye closes;
perhaps with
slight weakness

Flat nasolabial
fold

Flat nasolabial
fold

Raising Eyebrows
Forehead
not wrinkled;
eyebrow not raised

Raising Eyebrows

Smiling

Smiling
Paralysis of
lower face

Paralysis of
lower face

Forehead wrinkled;
eyebrow raised

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

787

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 17-9 Disorders of Muscle Tone

Flaccidity (or
Hypotonia)

Spasticity

Rigidity

Location of Lesion

Upper motor neuron
or corticospinal tract
systems.

Basal ganglia system.

Lower motor neuron
system at any point
from the anterior horn
cell to the peripheral
nerves, and in
cerebellar disease.

Both hemispheres,
usually in the frontal
lobes.

Description

Increased muscle tone
(hypertonia) is rate
dependent. Tone
increases when passive
movement is rapid,
and decreases when
passive movement is
slow. Tone is also
greater at the extremes
of the movement arc.
During rapid passive
movement, initial
hypertonia may give
way suddenly as the
limb relaxes. This
spastic “catch” and
relaxation is known as
“clasp-knife”
resistance.

Increased resistance
that persists
throughout the
movement arc,
independent of rate of
movement, is called
lead-pipe rigidity.
During ﬂexion and
extension of the wrist
or forearm, a
superimposed ratchetlike jerkiness is called
cogwheel rigidity, and
can be due to
underlying tremor.

Loss of muscle tone
(hypotonia) causes the
limb to be loose or
ﬂoppy. The affected
limbs may be
hyperextensible or
even ﬂail-like. Flaccid
muscles are often
weak.

Sudden changes in
tone accompany
passive range of
motion. Sudden loss of
tone that increases the
ease of motion is called
mitgehen (moving
with). Sudden increase
in tone making motion
more difﬁcult is called
gegenhalten (holding
against).

Common Cause

Stroke, especially late
or chronic stage.

Parkinsonism.

Guillain–Barré
syndrome; also initial
phase of spinal cord
injury (spinal shock)
or stroke.

Dementia.

788

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Paratonia

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 17-10 Abnormalities of Gait and Posture
Spastic Hemiparesis
Seen in corticospinal tract lesions
that cause poor control of ﬂexor
muscles during swing phase (for
example, from stroke).
■ Affected arm is ﬂexed, immobile,
and held close to the side, with
elbow, wrists, and
interphalangeal joints ﬂexed.
■ Affected leg extensors are
spastic; ankles are plantar-ﬂexed
and inverted.
■ Patients may drag toe, circle leg
stifﬂy outward and forward
(circumduction), or lean trunk to
contralateral side to clear
affected leg during walking.

Scissors Gait
Seen in spinal cord disease, causing
bilateral lower extremity spasticity,
including adductor spasm.
■ Gait is stiff. Patients advance
each leg slowly, and the thighs
tend to cross forward on each
other at each step.
■ Steps are short.
■ Patients appear to be walking
through water, and there may be
compensating sway of the trunk
away from the side of the
advancing leg.
■ Scissoring is seen in all spasticity
disorders, most commonly
cerebral palsy.

Steppage Gait
Seen in foot drop, usually
secondary to peripheral motor unit
disease.
■ Patients either drag the feet or
lift them high, with knees ﬂexed,
and bring them down with a
slap onto the ﬂoor, appearing to
be walking up stairs.
■ Patients cannot walk on their
heels.
■ Gait may involve one or both
legs.
■ Tibialis anterior and toe
extensors are weak.

Parkinsonian Gait
Seen in the basal ganglia defects
of Parkinson disease.
■ Posture is stooped, with ﬂexion
of head, arms, hips, and knees.
■ Patients are slow getting started.
■ Steps are short and shufﬂing,
with involuntary hastening
(festination).
■ Arm swings are decreased, and
patients turn around stifﬂy—“all
in one piece.”
■ Postural control is poor
(anteropulsion or retropulsion).

Cerebellar Ataxia
Seen in disease of the cerebellum
or associated tracts.
■ Gait is staggering and unsteady,
with feet wide apart and
exaggerated difﬁculty on turns.
■ Patients cannot stand steadily
with feet together, whether eyes
are open or closed.
■ Other cerebellar signs are
present such as dysmetria,
nystagmus, and intention
tremor.

Sensory Ataxia
Seen in loss of position sense in
the legs from polyneuropathy or
posterior column damage.
■ Gait is unsteady and wide based
(with feet wide apart).
■ Patients throw their feet forward
and outward and bring them
down, ﬁrst on the heels and then
on the toes, with a double
tapping sound.
■ Patients watch the ground for
guidance when walking.
■ With eyes closed, patients cannot
stand steadily with feet together
(positive Romberg sign), and the
staggering gait worsens.

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

789

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 17-11 Metabolic and Structural Coma
Although there are many causes of coma, most can be classiﬁed as either structural or metabolic. Findings vary widely in
individual patients; the features listed are general guidelines rather than strict diagnostic criteria. Remember that psychiatric
disorders may mimic coma.

Pathophysiology

Clinical Features
■ Respiratory pattern

■

■

Pupillary size and reaction

Level of consciousness

Examples of Cause

790

Toxic—Metabolic

Structural

Arousal centers poisoned or
critical substrates depleted

Lesion destroys or compresses brainstem arousal
areas, either directly or secondary to more distant
expanding mass lesions

If regular, may be normal or
hyperventilation
If irregular, usually Cheyne–
Stokes

Irregular, especially Cheyne–Stokes or ataxic
breathing
Also with selected stereotypical patterns like
“apneustic” respiration (peak inspiratory arrest) or
central hyperventilation

Equal, reactive to light. If pinpoint
from opiates or cholinergics, you
may need a magnifying glass to
see the reaction
May be unreactive if ﬁxed and
dilated from anticholinergics or
hypothermia

Unequal or unreactive to light (ﬁxed)
Midposition, ﬁxed—suggests midbrain compression

Changes after pupils change

Changes before pupils change

Uremia, hyperglycemia alcohol,
drugs, liver failure
hypothyroidism, hypoglycemia,
anoxia, ischemia meningitis,
encephalitis hyperthermia,
hypothermia

Epidural, subdural, or intracerebral hemorrhage;
large cerebral infarction; tumor, abscess; brainstem
infarct, tumor, or hemorrhage; cerebellar infarct,
hemorrhage, tumor, or abscess

Dilated, ﬁxed—suggests
compression of CN III from herniation

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 17-12 Glasgow Coma Scale
Activity

Score

Eye Opening
None
To pain
To speech
Spontaneous

1 = Even to supraorbital pressure
2 = Pain from sternum/limb/supraorbital pressure
3 = Nonspeciﬁc response, not necessarily to command
4 = Eyes open, not necessarily aware

___________

Motor Response
None
Extension
Flexor response
Withdrawal
Localizes pain
Obeys commands

1 = To any pain; limbs remain ﬂaccid
2 = Shoulder adducted and shoulder and forearm internally rotated
3 = Withdrawal response or assumption of hemiplegic posture
4 = Arm withdraws to pain, shoulder abducts
5 = Arm attempts to remove supraorbital/chest pressure
6 = Follows simple commands

__________

Verbal Response
None
Incomprehensible
Inappropriate
Confused
Oriented

1 = No verbalization of any type
2 = Moans/groans, no speech
3 = Intelligible, no sustained sentences
4 = Converses but confused, disoriented
5 = Converses and is oriented

__________
TOTAL (3–15)a

a

Interpretation: Patients with scores of 3–8 usually are considered to be in a coma.

Source: Teasdale G, Jennett B. Assessment of coma and impaired consciousness. A practical scale. Lancet. 1974;304(7872):81.

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

791

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 17-13 Pupils in Comatose Patients

Pupillary size, equality, and light reactions are important signs in assessing the cause of coma the region of the brain that is
impaired. Keep in mind that unrelated pupillary abnormalities may precede coma, for example from use of miotic drops for
glaucoma or mydriatic drops for viewing the ocular fundi (not recommended).

Small or Pinpoint Pupils
Bilaterally small pupils (1–2.5 mm) suggest damage to the
sympathetic pathways in the hypothalamus, or metabolic
encephalopathy, a diffuse failure of cerebral function that has
many causes, including drugs. Light reactions are usually
normal.
Pinpoint pupils (<1 mm) suggest a hemorrhage in the pons, or
the effects of morphine, heroin, or other narcotics. The light
reactions may be seen with a magnifying glass.

Midposition Fixed Pupils
Pupils that are in the midposition or slightly dilated (4–6 mm)
and are ﬁxed to light suggest structural damage in the
midbrain.

Large Pupils
Bilaterally ﬁxed and dilated pupils may be due to severe anoxia
and its sympathomimetic effects, as seen after cardiac arrest.
They may also result from atropine-like agents, phenothiazines,
or tricyclic antidepressants.
Bilaterally large reactive pupils may be due to cocaine,
amphetamine, LSD, or other sympathetic nervous system
agonists.

One Large Pupil
A pupil that is ﬁxed and dilated warns of herniation of the
temporal lobe, causing compression of the oculomotor nerve
and midbrain. A single large pupil is commonly seen in
diabetic patients with infarction of CN III.

792

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 17-14 Abnormal Postures in Comatose Patients
Flexed

Plantar flexed

Internally rotated

Externally rotated

Plantar flexed

Flexed

Flexed

Adducted

Hemiplegia (Early)
Sudden unilateral brain damage involving the
corticospinal tract may produce a hemiplegia
(one-sided paralysis), which is ﬂaccid early in
its course. Spasticity will develop later. The
paralyzed arm and leg are slack. They fall
loosely and without tone when raised and
dropped to the bed. Spontaneous movements
or responses to noxious stimuli are limited to
the opposite side. The leg may lie externally
rotated. One side of the lower face may be
paralyzed, and that cheek puffs out on
expiration. Both eyes may be turned away
from the paralyzed side.

Flaccid

Pronated

Decorticate Rigidity (Abnormal Flexor
Response)
In decorticate rigidity, the upper arms are ﬂexed
tight to the sides with elbows, wrists, and
ﬁngers ﬂexed. The legs are extended and
internally rotated. The feet are plantar ﬂexed.
This posture implies a destructive lesion of the
corticospinal tracts within or very near the
cerebral hemispheres. When unilateral, this is
the posture of chronic spastic hemiplegia.

Extended

Adducted

Decerebrate Rigidity (Abnormal
Extensor Response)
In decerebrate rigidity, the jaws are clenched
and the neck is extended. The arms are
adducted and stifﬂy extended at the elbows,
with forearms pronated, wrists and ﬁngers
ﬂexed. The legs are stifﬂy extended at the knees,
with the feet plantar ﬂexed. This posture may
occur spontaneously or only in response to
external stimuli such as light, noise, or pain. It
is caused by a lesion in the diencephalon,
midbrain, or pons, although may also arise
from severe metabolic disorders such as
hypoxia or hypoglycemia.

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

793

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
REFERENCES

References
1. Wiebers DO, Dale AJD, Kokmen E, et al. (eds). Mayo Clinic Examinations in Neurology. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Mosby; 1998.
2. Campbell WW. DeJong’s The Neurologic Examination. 7th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins; 2013.
3. Wright BL, Lai JT, Sinclair AJ. Cerebrospinal ﬂuid and lumbar
puncture: a practical review. Neurol. 2012;259:1530.
4. Straus SE, Thorpe KE, Holroyd-Leduc J. How do I perform a lumbar puncture and analyze the results to diagnose bacterial meningitis? JAMA. 2006;296:2012.
5. National Institute of Neurologic Disorders and Stroke, National
Institutes of Health. Spinal cord injury: hope through research.
Updated February 23, 2015. Available at http://www.ninds.nih.
gov/disorders/sci/detail_sci.htm. Accessed April 23, 2015.
6. Chad DA, Stone JH, Gupta R. Case 14-2011: A woman with
asymmetric sensory loss and paresthesias. N Engl J Med.
2011;364:1856.
7. Dyck PJ, Herrmann DN, Staff NP, et al. Assessing decreased sensation and increased sensory phenomena in diabetic polyneuropathies. Diabetes. 2013;62:3677.
8. Kanji JN, Anglin RE, Hunt DL, et al. Does this patient with diabetes have large-ﬁber peripheral neuropathy? JAMA. 2010;303:1526.
9. International Headache Society. The International Classiﬁcation of
Headache Disorders. 3rd ed. (beta version). Cephalalgia. 2013;33:629.
10. De Luca GC, Bartleson JD. When and how to investigate the
patient with headache. Semin Neurol. 2010;30:131.
11. D’Souza S. Aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage. J Neurosurg
Anesthesiol. 2015;27:222.
12. Mortimer AM, Bradley MD, Stoodley NG, et al. Thunderclap
headache: diagnostic considerations and neuroimaging features.
Clin Radiol. 2013;68:e101.
13. Dill E. Thunderclap headache. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2014;
14:437.
14. Bhimraj A. Acute community-acquired bacterial meningitis in
adults: an evidence-based review. Cleve Clin J Med. 2012;79:393.
15. Brouwer MC, Tunkel AR, van de Beek D. Epidemiology, diagnosis,
and antimicrobial treatment of acute bacterial meningitis. Clin
Microbiol Rev. 2010;23:467.
16. Logan SA, MacMahon E. Viral meningitis. BMJ. 2008;
336(7634):36.
17. Omuro A, DeAngelis LM. Glioblastoma and other malignant gliomas. JAMA. 2013; 310:1842.
18. Brouwer MC, Tunkel AR, McKhann GM, et al. Brain abscess.
N Engl J Med. 2014;371:447.
19. Bushnell C, McCullough L. Stroke prevention in women: synopsis of the 2014 American Heart Association/American Stroke
Association guideline. Ann Intern Med. 2012;160:853.
20. Sacco S, Ornello R, Ripa P, et al. Migraine and hemorrhagic stroke:
a meta-analysis. Stroke. 2012;44:3032.
21. Sacco S, Ricci S, Degan D, et al. Migraine in women: the role of
hormones and their impact on vascular diseases. J Headache Pain.
2012;13:177.
22. McGregor EA. In the clinic: migraine. Ann Intern Med. 2013;159:
ITC5-1.
23. Detsky ME, McDonald DR, Baerlocher MO, et al. Does this patient
with headache have a migraine or need neuroimaging? JAMA.
2006;296:1274.
24. Wipperman J. Dizziness and vertigo. Prim Care. 2014;41:115.

794

25. Siket MS, Edlow JA. Transient ischemic attack: reviewing the evolution of the deﬁnition, diagnosis, risk stratiﬁcation, and management
for the emergency physician. Emerg Med Clin North Am. 2012;30:745.
26. Cucchiara B, Kasner SE. In the clinic. Transient ischemic attack.
Ann Intern Med. 2011;154:ITC-1.
27. Karras C, Aitchison R, Aitchison P, et al. Adult stroke summary.
Dis Mon. 2013;59:210.
28. Nouh A, Remke J, Ruland S. Ischemic posterior circulation stroke:
a review of anatomy, clinical presentations, diagnosis, and current
management. Front Neurol. 2014;5:30.
29. Ishiyama G, Ishiyama A. Vertebrobasilar infarcts and ischemia.
Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 2011;44:415.
30. Runchey S, McGee S. Does this patient have a hemorrhagic
stroke? Clinical ﬁndings distinguishing hemorrhagic stroke from
ischemic stroke. JAMA. 2010;303:2280.
31. Yuki N, Hartung H-P. Guillain-Barré Syndrome. N Engl J Med.
2012;366:2294.
32. Baggi F, Andreetta F, Maggi L, et al. Complete stable remission and
autoantibody speciﬁcity in myasthenia gravis. Neurology. 2013;80:188.
33. Spillane J, Higham E, Kullmann DM. Myasthenia gravis. BMJ.
2012;345:e8497.
34. Yoo M, Sharma N, Pasnoor M, et al. Painful diabetic peripheral
neuropathy: presentations, mechanisms, and exercise therapy.
J Diabetes Metab. 2013;Suppl 10:005.
35. Gilron I, Baron R, Jensen T. Neuropathic pain: principles of diagnosis and treatment. Mayo Clin Proc. 2015;90:532.
36. Benditt DG, Adkisson WO. Approach to the patient with syncope: venues, presentations, diagnoses. Cardiol Clin. 2013;31:9.
37. Low PA, Tomalia VA. Orthostatic hypotension: mechanisms,
causes, management. J Clin Neurol. 2015;11:220.
38. Commission on Classiﬁcation and Terminology of the International
League Against Epilepsy (Berg AT, Berkovic SF, Brodie MJ, et al). A
proposed diagnostic scheme for people with epileptic seizures and
with epilepsy: report of the ILAE Task Force on Classiﬁcation and
Terminology, 2005–2009. Epilepsia. 2010;51:676. Available at http://
onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1528-1167.2010.02522.x/
full. Accessed July 31, 2015.
39. French JA, Pedley TA. Initial management of epilepsy. New Engl J
Med. 2008;359:166.
40. American College of Physicians. Epilepsy syndromes and their diagnosis. In: Neurology, Medical Knowledge Self-Assessment Program (MKSAP)
15. Philadelphia, PA: American College of Physicians; 2006:74.
41. Elias WJ, Shah BB. Tremor. JAMA. 2014;311:948.
42. Benito-Leon J. Essential tremor: a neurodegenerative disease?
Tremor Other Hyperkinet Mov (NY). 2014;4:252.
43. Connolly BS, Lang AE. Pharmocological treatment of Parkinson
disease, a review. JAMA. 2014; 311:1670.
44. Jankovic J. Parkinson’s disease: clinical features and diagnosis. J
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2008;79:368.
45. Wijemanne S, Jankovic J. Restless legs syndrome: clinical presentation diagnosis and treatment. Sleep Med. 2015;16:678.
46. Silber MH, Becker PM, Earley C, et al. Willis-Ekbom Disease
Foundation revised consensus statement on the management of
restless legs syndrome. Mayo Clin Proc. 2013;88:977.
47. Mozaffarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, et al. Heart disease and stroke
statistics—2015 update: a report from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2015;131:e29.
48. Easton JD, Saver JL, Albers GW, et al. Deﬁnition and evaluation
of transient ischemic attack: a scientiﬁc statement for healthcare
professionals from the American Heart Association/American

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
REFERENCES
Stroke Association Stroke Council; Council on Cardiovascular
Surgery and Anesthesia; Council on Cardiovascular Surgery and
Anesthesia; Council on Cardiovascular Radiology and Intervention; Council on Cardiovascular Nursing; and the Interdisciplinary Council on Peripheral Vascular Disease. The American
Academy of Neurology afﬁrms the value of this statement as an
educational tool for neurologists. Stroke. 2009;40(6):2276.
49. Kleindorfer DO, Lindsell C, Broderick JP, et al. Impact of socioeconomic status on stroke incidence: A population-based study.
Ann Neurol. 2006;60:480.
50. Kleindorfer D, Panagos P, Pancioli A, et al. Incidence and shortterm prognosis of transient ischemic attack in a population-based
study. Stroke. 2005;36:720.
51. Harper S, Rushani D, Kaufman JS. Trends in the black-white life
expectancy gap, 2003–2008. JAMA. 2012;307:2257.
52. Mosca L, Benjamin EJ, Berra K, et al. Effectiveness-based guidelines for the prevention of cardiovascular disease in women—
2011 update: a guideline from the American Heart Association.
Circulation. 2011;123:1243.
53. American Heart Association, American Stroke Association. Stroke
warning signs and symptoms. Available at http://www.strokeassociation.org/STROKEORG/WarningSigns/Stroke-WarningSigns-and-Symptoms_UCM_308528_SubHomePage.jsp.
Accessed July 22, 2015.
54. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Ofﬁce of Disease
Prevention and Health Promotion. Healthy People 2020—Heart
disease and stroke, objectives. Available at http://www.healthypeople.gov/2020/topics-objectives/topic/heart-disease-andstroke/objectives. Accessed July 22, 2015.
55. Wolff T, Miller T, Ko S. Aspirin for the primary prevention of
cardiovascular events: an update of the evidence for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2009;150:405.
56. Pignone M, Alberts MJ, Colwell JA, et al. Aspirin for primary prevention of cardiovascular events in people with diabetes: a position statement of the American Diabetes Association, a scientiﬁc
statement of the American Heart Association, and an expert consensus document of the American College of Cardiology Foundation. Diabetes Care. 2010;33:1395.
57. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Final Recommendation Statement. Carotid artery stenosis: screening, July 2014. U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services; 2014. Available at http://www.
uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Document/UpdateSummaryFinal/carotid-artery-stenosis-screening?ds=1&s=carotid
artery. Accessed August 3, 2015.
58. Jonas DE, Feltner C, Amick HR, et al. Screening for asymptomatic
carotid artery stenosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis for the
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2014;161:336.
59. Kernan WN, Ovbiagele B, Black HR, et al. Guidelines for the prevention of stroke in patients with stroke and transient ischemic attack:
a guideline for healthcare professionals from the American Heart
Association/American Stroke Association. Stroke. 2014;45:2160.
60. Ji R, Schwamm LH, Pervez MA, et al. Ischemic stroke and transient ischemic attack in young adults: risk factors, diagnostic
yield, neuroimaging, and thrombolysis. JAMA Neurol. 2013;70:51.
61. American College of Physicians. Stroke, in Neurology. Medical
Knowledge Self-Assessment Program (MKSAP) 16. Philadelphia, PA:
American College of Physicians; 2012:24.
62. Tesfaye S, Boulton AJ, Dyck PJ, et al. Diabetic neuropathies:
update on deﬁnitions, diagnostic criteria, estimation of severity,
and treatments. Diabetes Care. 2010;33:2285.

63. American Diabetes Association. Microvascular complications and
foot care. Diabetes Care. 2015;38(Suppl):S58.
64. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Prevalence of
stroke—United States, 2006–2010. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly
Rep. 2012;61:379.
65. Yawn BP, Saddier P, Wollan PC, et al. A population-based study of
the incidence and complication rates of herpes zoster before zoster vaccine introduction. Mayo Clin Proc. 2007;82:1341.
66. Hales CM, Harpaz R, Ortega-Sanchez I, et al.; Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention. Update on recommendations for use of
herpes zoster vaccine. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2014;63:729.
67. Wong CL, Holroyd-Leduc J, Simel DL, et al. Does this patient have
delirium?: value of bedside instruments. JAMA. 2010;304:779.
68. Inouye SK, Kosar CM, Tommet D, et al. The CAM-S: development
and validation of a new scoring system for delirium severity in 2
cohorts. Ann Intern Med. 2014;160:526.
69. O’Mahony R, Murthy L, Akunne A, et al.; Guideline Development
Group. Synopsis of the National Institute for Health and Clinical
Excellence guideline for prevention of delirium. Ann Intern Med.
2011;154:746.
70. Rabins PV, Blass DM. In the clinic. Dementia. Ann Intern Med.
2014;161:ITC1; quiz ITC16.
71. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders. 5th ed. (DSM-5). Washington, DC:
America Psychiatric Association; 2013.
72. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Dementia/Alzheimer’s disease. Updated October 4, 2013. Available at http://www.
cdc.gov/mentalhealth/basics/mental-illness/dementia.htm.
Accessed July 22, 2015.
73. Barnes DE, Yaffe K. The projected effect of risk factor reduction
on Alzheimer’s disease prevalence. Lancet Neurol. 2011;10:819.
74. Daviglus ML, Bell CC, Berrettini W, et al. National Institutes of Health
State-of-the-Science Conference statement: preventing Alzheimer
disease and cognitive decline. Ann Intern Med. 2010;153:176.
75. Moyer VA. Screening for cognitive impairment in older adults:
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement.
Ann Intern Med. 2014;160:791.
76. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB. The Patient Health Questionnaire-2: validity of a two-item depression screener. Med Care.
2003;41:1284.
77. Holsinger T, Deveau J, Boustani M, et al. Does this patient have
dementia? JAMA. 2007;297:2391.
78. American Academy of Neurology. Neurology clerkship core curriculum guidelines. See also Appendix 2: Guidelines for a Screening Neurologic Examination, p. 7. Available at https://www.aan.
com/uploadedFiles/4CME_and_Training/2Training/3Fellowship_
Resources/5Core_Curricula/skilz.pdf. Accessed July 23, 2015.
79. Gelb D, Gunderson C, Henry K, Kirshner H, Józefowicz R, for the Consortium of Neurology Clerkship Directors and the Undergraduate Education Subcommittee of the American Academy of Neurology. The
neurology clerkship core curriculum. Neurology. 2002;58(6):849–852.
80. Moore FG, Chalk C. The essential neurologic examination. Neurology. 2009;72:2020.
81. Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination. Videos 17, 18—The
Nervous System. Available at https://batesvisualguide.com/.
Accessed July 23, 2015.
82. American Academy of Neurology. Educational resources. Available at
https://www.aan.com/residents-and-fellows/clerkship-and-coursedirector-resources/educational-resources/ and http://www.aan.com/
go/education/curricula/internal/toc. Accessed July 23, 2015.

C H A P T E R 17

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Nervous System

795

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
REFERENCES
83. Wright State University (Pearson JC, Nieder GL, Mathews T, et al.).
Neurological teaching videos—a database-driven website for distribution of quicktime streaming videos to neuroscience educators. Available at http://corescholar.libraries.wright.edu/
ncbp/383/. Accessed July 23, 2015.
84. McGee S. Ch 56, Visual ﬁeld testing, in Evidence-Based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:513–520.
85. McGee S. Ch 20, The pupils, in Evidence-Based Physical Diagnosis.
3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:176–178.
86. McGee S. Ch 57, Nerves of the eye muscles, in Evidence-Based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:521–531.
87. Zandian A, Osiro S, Hudson R, et al. The neurologist’s dilemma:
a comprehensive clinical review of Bell’s palsy, with emphasis on
current management trends. Med Sci Monit. 2014;20:83.
88. McGee S. Ch 22, Hearing, in Evidence-Based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd
ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:190.
89. Darcy P, Moughty AM. Pronator drift. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:320.
90. Daum C, Aybek S. Validity of the “drift without pronation” sign in
conversion disorder. BMC Neurol. 2013;13:31.
91. Stone J, Carson A, Duncan R, et al. Which neurological diseases
are most likely to be associated with “symptoms unexplained by
organic disease.” J Neurol. 2012;259:33.
92. Stone J, Carson A, Sharpe M. Functional symptoms and signs in
neurology: assessment and diagnosis. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2005;76(Suppl 1):i2.
93. Stabler SP. Clinical practice. Vitamin B12 deﬁciency. N Engl J Med.
2013; 368:149.
94. Kirshblum SC, Burns SP, Biering-Sorensen F, et al. International
Standards for Neurological Classiﬁcation of Spinal Cord Injury
(Revised 2011). J Spinal Cord Med. 2011;34:535.
95. Hallett M. NINDS myotatic reﬂex scale. Neurology. 1993;43:2723.
96. Isaza Jaramillo SP, Uribe Uribe CS, García Jimenez FA, et al. Accuracy of the Babinski sign in the identiﬁcation of pyramidal tract
dysfunction. J Neurol Sci. 2014;343:66.
97. McGee S. Ch 24, Meninges, in Evidence-Based Physical Diagnosis.
3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2012:210–214.
98. Thomas KE, Hasbun R, Jekel J, et al. The diagnostic accuracy of
Kernig’s sign, Brudzinski’s sign, and nuchal rigidity in adults with
suspected meningitis. Clin Infect Dis. 2002;35:46.

796

99. Ward MA, Greenwood TM, Kumar DR, et al. Josef Brudzinski and
Vladimir Mikhailovich Kernig: signs for diagnosing meningitis.
Clin Med Res. 2010;8:13.
100. McGee S. Ch 62, Disorders of nerve roots, plexuses, in Evidence-Based
Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders;
2012:607–609.
101. Mendizabal M, Silva MO. Asterixis. N Engl J Med. 2010;363:e14.
102. Edlow JA, Rabinstein A, Traub SJ, et al. Diagnosis of reversible
causes of coma. Lancet. 2014;384(9959):2064.
103. Moore SA, Wijdicks EF. The acutely comatose patient: clinical
approach and diagnosis. Semin Neurol. 2013;33:110.
104. Wijdicks EF. The Comatose Patient. 2nd ed. New York, NY: Oxford
University Press; 2014.
105. Henry TR, Ezzeddine MA. Approach to the patient with transient
alteration of consciousness. Neurol Clin Pract. 2012;2:179.
106. Pope JV, Edlow JA. Avoiding misdiagnosis in patients with neurological emergencies. Emerg Med Int. 2012;2012:949275.
107. Brown EN, Lydic R, Schiff ND. General anesthesia, sleep, and
coma. N Engl J Med. 2010;363:2638.
108. Teasdale G, Jennett B. Assessment of coma and impaired consciousness. A practical scale. Lancet. 1974;304(7872):81.
109. Sandroni C, Geocadin RG. Neurological prognostication after cardiac arrest. Curr Opin Crit Care. 2015;21:209.
110. Sandroni C, Cariou A, Cavallaro F, et al. Prognostication in comatose survivors of cardiac arrest: an advisory statement from the
European Resuscitation Council and the European Society of
Intensive Care Medicine. Resuscitation. 2014;85:1779.
111. American College of Physicians. Syncope. In: General Internal
Medicine, Medical Knowledge Self-Assessment Program (MKSAP) 16.
Philadelphia, PA: American College of Physicians; 2012:45.
112. Freeman R, Wieling W, Axelrod FB, et al. Consensus statement on
the deﬁnition of orthostatic hypotension, neutrally mediated syncope and the postural tachycardia syndrome. Clin Auton Res.
2011;21:69.
113. Vijayan J, Sharma VK. Neurogenic orthostatic hypotension—
management update and role of droxidopa. Ther Clin Risk Manag.
2015;8:915.
114. Chen LY, Benditt DG, Shen WK. Management of syncope in
adults: an update. Mayo Clin Proc. 2008;83:1280.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

UNIT

3

Special Populations

Chapter 18

Chapter 20

Assessing Children: Infancy
through Adolescence 799

The Older Adult

Chapter 19

The Pregnant Woman

927

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

955

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

C H A P T E R

18

Assessing Children: Infancy
through Adolescence
Peter G. Szilagyi, MD, MPH

The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (Vol. 2: Head-to-Toe Assessment: Infant;
Vol. 3: Head-to-Toe Assessment: Child)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com

This chapter highlights clinical assessment for each pediatric age group, beginning with general principles of development and key components of health promotion. Newborns, infants, young and school-aged children, and adolescents
are covered in separate sections, with relevant discussions of development, history taking, health promotion and counseling, and techniques of examination
for each (Figs. 18-1 to 18-3).

F I G U R E 1 8 - 1 . Infants have
surprising abilities.

Guide to Chapter Organization
General Principles of Child Development
Health Promotion and Counseling: Key Components
Assessing the Newborn
Assessing the Infant
Assessing Young and School-Aged Children
Assessing Adolescents
Recording Your Findings

F I G U R E 1 8 - 2 . A drive for
independence appears in school-aged
children.

Inexperienced examiners are often intimidated when approaching a tiny baby or
an upset child, especially under the critical eyes of anxious parents. Although it
is initially challenging, you will come to enjoy almost all pediatric encounters.
Review Chapter 1, Overview: Physical Examination and History Taking, for the
methods and sequence of examining adults. When examining infants and children, the sequence should vary according to the child’s age and comfort level.
Perform less invasive maneuvers early and potentially distressing maneuvers near the
end of the examination. For example, palpate the head and neck and auscultate
the heart and lungs early, and examine the ears and mouth and palpate the abdomen near the end. If the child reports pain in one area examine that area last.
C H A P T E R 18

F I G U R E 1 8 - 3 . Social interactions
become important in adolescence.

| Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

799

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF CHILD DEVELOPMENT
The format of the clinical record is the same for both children and adults.
Although the sequence of the physical examination may vary, convert your clinical ﬁndings into the traditional written or electronic format.

General Principles of
Child Development
Childhood is a period of remarkable physical, cognitive, and social growth—
by far the greatest in a person’s lifetime. Within a few short years, children’s size
increases 20-fold, they acquire sophisticated language and reasoning, they
develop complex social interactions, and they progress toward mature adults.

Understanding the normal physical, cognitive, and social development of children facilitates effective interviews and physical examinations and is the basis for
distinguishing normal from abnormal ﬁndings.
Four Principles of Child Development
1. Child development proceeds along a predictable pathway.
2. The range of normal development is wide.
3. Various physical, social, and environmental factors, as well as diseases, can
aﬀect child development and health.
4. The child’s developmental level aﬀects how you conduct the history and
physical examination.1,2

■ Principle #1: Child development proceeds along a predictable pathway governed

by the maturing brain. You can measure age-speciﬁc milestones and use
them to characterize development as normal or abnormal. Because your
health care visit and physical examination take place at one point in time,
you need to determine where the child ﬁts along a developmental trajectory.
Milestones are achieved in an order than can be anticipated. Loss of milestones
is always concerning.
■ Principle #2: The range of normal development is wide. Children mature at dif-

ferent rates. Each child’s physical, cognitive, and social development should
fall within a broad developmental range.
■ Principle #3: Various physical, social, and environmental factors, as well as diseases,

can affect child development and health. For example, chronic illnesses, child abuse,
and poverty can all cause detectable physical abnormalities and alter the rate and
course of development. Additionally, children with physical or cognitive disabilities
may not follow the expected age-speciﬁc developmental trajectory (Fig. 18-4).
■ Principle #4: The child’s developmental level affects how you conduct the clinical

history and physical examination. For example, interviewing a 5-year-old is
800

F I G U R E 1 8 - 4 . Child development
is affected by many factors.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
fundamentally different than interviewing an adolescent. Both order and
style differ from the adult examination. Before performing a physical examination, attempt to ascertain the child’s approximate developmental level and
adapt your physical examination to that level. An understanding of normal
child development helps you achieve these tasks.

Health Promotion and
Counseling: Key Components
Benjamin Franklin noted that “an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure.”
This adage is particularly true for children and adolescents because prevention
and health promotion at a young age can result in improved health outcomes for
decades. Pediatric clinicians dedicate substantial time to health supervision visits
and health promotion activities.
Several national and international organizations have developed guidelines for
health promotion in children.3–5 Current concepts of health promotion include
the detection and prevention of disease as well as active promotion of the wellbeing of children and their families spanning physical, cognitive, emotional, and
social health.
Every interaction with a child and family is an opportunity for health promotion. From the interview to the physical examination, think of your interactions
as an opportunity for two important tasks: the detection of clinical problems and
the promotion of health. Capitalize on the examination to offer age-appropriate
guidance about the child’s development. Provide suggestions about reading, conversing, playing music, and optimizing opportunities for gross and ﬁne motor
development. Advise parents about upcoming developmental stages and strategies to encourage their child’s development. Parents are the major agents of health
promotion for children and your advice is implemented through them.

The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) publishes guidelines for health supervision visits and the key age-appropriate components of these visits (see www.healthychildren.org). Remember that children and adolescents who have a chronic illness
or high-risk family or environmental circumstances will probably require more
frequent visits and more intensive health promotion. Key health promotion issues
and strategies, tailored for speciﬁc age groups, are found throughout this chapter.
Integrate explanations of your physical ﬁndings with health promotion. Provide advice about expected maturational changes or how health behaviors can
affect physical ﬁndings (e.g., exercise may reduce blood pressure and prevent
obesity). Be sure to demonstrate the relationship between healthy lifestyles and
physical health. For example, give parents a copy of their child’s body mass index
(BMI) result along with a “prescription” for healthy living.
Childhood immunizations are a mainstay for health promotion and have been
heralded as the most signiﬁcant clinical achievement in public health worldwide.
C H A P T E R 18

| Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

801

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
The childhood immunization schedule changes yearly. Updates are published
widely and disseminated on websites of the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) (see www.cdc.gov) and the AAP.6,7
Age-speciﬁc screening procedures are performed at speciﬁc ages. These include
growth parameters and developmental screening at all ages, blood pressure
screening after age 3 years, BMI screening after age 2 years, vision and hearing
screening at key ages, and behavioral and mental health screening. Increasingly,
standardized screening instruments are being used to assist clinicians in identifying abnormalities. In addition, screening procedures recommended for all children at certain ages or for speciﬁc high-risk patients (depending on the test)
include tests for lead poisoning, anemia, tuberculosis exposure, dyslipidemia,
urinary tract infections, and sexually transmitted infections. There is variation
worldwide in recommendations for screening tests; the AAP recommendations
are provided at www.aap.org.
Anticipatory guidance is a major component of the pediatric visit.4 Key areas
cover a broad range of topics, from clinical to developmental, social, and emotional health.
Key Components of Pediatric
Health Promotion
1. Age-appropriate developmental achievement of the child
● Physical (maturation, growth, puberty)
● Motor (gross and ﬁne motor skills)
● Cognitive (developmental milestones, language, school performance)
● Emotional (self-regulation, mood, temperament, self-eﬃcacy, self-esteem,
independence)
● Social (social competence, self-responsibility, integration with family and
community, peer interactions)
2. Health supervision visits
● Periodic assessment of clinical and oral health
● More frequent health supervision visits for children with special health
care needs
3. Integration of physical examination ﬁndings with health promotion
4. Immunizations
5. Screening procedures
6. Anticipatory guidance4,8
● Healthy habits
● Nutrition and healthy eating
● Safety and prevention of injury
● Physical activity
● Sexual development and sexuality
● Self-responsibility, eﬃcacy, and healthy self-esteem
● Family relationships (interactions, strengths, supports)
● Positive parenting strategies
(continued )

802

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

Key Components of Pediatric
Health Promotion (continued )
Emotional and mental health
Oral health
● Recognition of illness
● Sleep
● Screen time
● Prevention of risky behaviors (e.g., tobacco, alcohol and drug use, unprotected sex)
● School and vocation
● Peer relationships
● Community interactions
7. Partnership among health care provider, child/adolescent, and family
●
●

ASSESSING THE NEWBORN
The ﬁrst year of life, or infancy, is divided into the neonatal period (the ﬁrst
28 days) and the postneonatal period (29 days to 1 year).

Tips for Examining Newborns
Examine the newborn in the presence of the parents.
Swaddle and then undress the newborn as the examination proceeds.
● Dim the lights and rock the newborn to encourage the eyes to open.
● Observe feeding, if possible, particularly breast-feeding.
● Demonstrate calming maneuvers to parents (e.g., swaddling).
● Observe and teach parents about transitions as the newborn arouses.
● A typical sequence for the examination of the newborn:
● Careful observation before (and during) the examination
● Heart
● Lungs
● Head, neck, and clavicles
● Ears and mouth
● Hips
● Abdomen and genitourinary system
● Lower extremities, back
● Eyes, whenever they are spontaneously open or at end of examination
● Skin, as you go along
● Neurologic system
●
●

C H A P T E R 18

| Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

803

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
The ﬁrst pediatric examination is performed immediately after delivery by
obstetrical or pediatric clinicians. A
comprehensive pediatric examination
is then generally performed within
24 hours of birth (Fig. 18-5). Subsequent physical examinations occur at
regular intervals or when the infant is
ill. Assessment techniques for these
examinations are described in detail in
the following sections.

F I G U R E 1 8 - 5 . Physical examination
starts soon after birth.

If possible, do the physical examination in front of the parents so that they can
interact with you and ask questions. Parents may question their baby’s physical
appearance, so stating normal ﬁndings as you go can be reassuring. Observe parent interaction with their newborn and reinforce positive parenting behaviors. If
a mother has concerns about breast-feeding technique, you can watch how well
the breast-feeding baby latches on and sucks. Breast-feeding is physiologically
and psychologically optimal, but many mothers will need help and support at
ﬁrst. Early detection of difﬁculties and anticipatory guidance can promote and
sustain breast-feeding. This is an excellent opportunity to educate parents about
their baby and what their baby can do.

Newborns are most responsive 1 to 2 hours after a feeding, when they are
neither too satiated (and less responsive) nor too hungry (and more agitated).
Start with the newborn swaddled and comfortable. Then, for gradual stimulation and arousal, undress the newborn as the examination proceeds. If the
newborn becomes agitated, use a paciﬁer or a bottle of formula (if not breastfeeding) or allow the baby to suck on your gloved ﬁnger. Reswaddle the baby
long enough to complete the parts of the examination that require a quiet
baby.

Immediate Assessment at Birth
Examining newborns immediately after birth is important for determining general condition, developmental status, abnormalities in gestational development,
and any congenital abnormalities. This examination may reveal diseases of cardiac, respiratory, or neurologic origin. Listen to the anterior thorax with your
stethoscope, palpate the abdomen, and inspect the head, face, oral cavity,
extremities, genitalia, and perineum. Refer to the section “Assessing the Infant” for
a complete physical examination.
Apgar Score. The Apgar score is an assessment of the newborn
immediately after birth. Its ﬁve components classify the newborn’s neurologic
recovery from the stress of birth and immediate adaptation to extrauterine life.
Score each newborn at 1 and 5 minutes after birth according to the following
table. Scoring is based on a 3-point scale (0, 1, or 2) for each component. Total
scores range from 0 to 10. Scoring may continue at 5-minute intervals until
the score is >7. If the 5-minute Apgar score is 8 or more, proceed to a more
complete examination.9
804

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

The Apgar Scoring System
Assigned Score
Clinical Sign

0

Heart rate
Absent
Respiratory eﬀort Absent
Muscle tone
Flaccid
Reﬂex irritabilitya No responses
Color

Blue, pale

1

2

<100
Slow and irregular
Some ﬂexion of the
arms and legs
Grimace

>100
Good; strong
Active movement

Pink body, blue
extremities

Vigorous cry,
sneeze, or cough
Pink all over

1-Min Apgar Score

5-Min Apgar Score

8–10
5–7

8—10
0—7

0–4

Normal
Some nervous system depression
Severe depression,
requiring immediate resuscitation

Example of Apgar score calculation
for a newborn with hypoxia:
Heart rate = 110 [2]
Respiratory effort = slow, irregular
[1]
Muscle tone = some flexion of arms/
legs [1]
Reflex irritability = grimace [1]
Color = blue, pale [0]
Apgar score = 5

Normal
High risk for subsequent central nervous system and
other organ system dysfunction

a

Reaction to suction of nares with bulb syringe.

Gestational Age and Birth Weight. Classify newborns according to
their gestational age of maturity and birth weight. These classiﬁcations help
predict clinical problems and morbidity. Some clinical practice guidelines
address the potential challenges of infants born before a certain gestational age
or below a speciﬁc birth weight.

Gestational age is based on speciﬁc neuromuscular signs and physical characteristics that change with gestational maturity. The Ballard Scoring System10 estimates gestational age to within 2 weeks, even in extremely premature infants. A
complete Ballard Scoring System, with instructions for assessing neuromuscular
and physical maturity, is included in Figure 18-6.
Classiﬁcation by Gestational Age and Birth Weight
Gestational Age Classiﬁcation

Gestational Age

Preterm
● Late preterm
● Term
● Postterm

●

<34 wks
34–36 wks
● 37–42 wks
● >42 wks

●

●

Birth Weight Classiﬁcation

Weight

●

Extremely low birth weight
Very low birth weight
● Low birth weight
● Normal birth weight

●

●

●

Preterm infants are at risk for both
short-term complications (mainly
respiratory and cardiovascular) as
well as long-term sequelae (e.g.,
neurodevelopmental).
Late preterm infants are at
considerable risk for prematurityrelated complications.

<1,000 g
<1,500 g
● <2,500 g
● ≥2,500 g

Postterm infants are at increased risk
of perinatal mortality or morbidity
such as asphyxia and meconium
aspiration.

C H A P T E R 18

| Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

805

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
The New Ballard Score for Determining Gestational Age in Weeks
−1

0

1

2

3

4

>90º

90º

60º

45º

30º

0º

180º

140º−180˚

110º−140˚

90º−110˚

<90º

5

Neuromuscular Maturity

Posture

Square
window
(wrist)

Arm recoil

Maturity Rating
Score Weeks

Popliteal
angle

180˚

160˚

140˚

120˚

100˚

90˚

Scarf sign

Heel to ear

Sticky
friable
transparent

Gelatinous
red,
translucent

Smooth pink,
visible veins

Superficial
peeling
and/or rash,
few veins

Lanugo

None

Sparse

Abundant

Thinning

Bald areas

Mostly
bald

Plantar
surface

heel — toe
40–50 mm: –1
<40 mm: –2

>50 mm
no crease

Faint
red marks

Anterior
transverse
crease only

Creases
anterior 2/3

Creases
over
entire sole

Breast

Imperceptible

barely
preceptible

flat areola
no bud

Stippled
areola
1–2-mm bud

Raised
areola
3–4-mm bud

Full areola
5–10-mm
bud

Eye/ear

Lids fused
loosely: –1
Tightly: –2

Lids open, Slightly curved
pinna flat
pinna; soft,
stays folded
slow recoil

Well-curved
pinna; soft,
but
ready recoil

Formed and
firm instant
recoil

Thick
cartilage,
ear stiff

Genitals
male

Scrotum
flat, smooth

Scrotum
empty,
faint rugae

Testes in
upper canal,
rare rugae

Testes
descending,
few rugae

Testes
down,
good
rugae

Testes
pendulous,
deep rugae

Genitals
female

Clitoris
prominent,
labia flat

Prominent
clitoris, small
labia minora

Prominent
clitoris,
enlarging
minora

Majora and
minora
equally
prominent

Majora
large,
minora
small

Majora
cover
clitoris
and minora

Physical Maturity

Skin

Cracking
pale areas
rare veins

Parchment
deep
cracking
no vessels

–10

20

–5

22

0

24

5

26

10

28

15

30

20

32

25

34

30

36

35

38

40

40

45

42

50

44

<90˚

Leathery
cracked
wrinkled

F I G U R E 1 8 - 6 . The sum of the scores for all of the neuromuscular and physical maturity items provides an estimate of
gestational age in weeks, using the maturity rating scale at the lower right potion of the ﬁgure. (Redrawn from Ballard JL, Khoury JC, Wedig K,
et al. New Ballard Score, expanded to include extremely premature infants. J Pediatr. 1991;119:417.)

806

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
A useful classiﬁcation, shown below, is derived from the gestational age and birth
weight on the intrauterine growth curve.
Newborn Classiﬁcations
Category

Abbreviation

Percentile

Small for gestational age
Appropriate for gestational age
Large for gestational age

SGA
AGA
LGA

<10th
10–90th
>90th

Figure 18-7 displays the intrauterine growth curves for the 10th and 90th percentiles and depicts the categories of maturity for newborns based on gestational
age and birth weight.
Intrauterine Growth Curves
5
4.5
90%
4

Large for gestational age
Appropriate
for gestational age

Birth Weight (kg)

3.5
3

10%

2.5

Small for
gestational age

2

A

B

1
0.5

27

29

31

33 35 37 39
Weeks of Gestation

Premature

A common complication among LGA
newborns is hypoglycemia, which can
result in jitteriness, irritability, cyanosis,
or other health issues.
While no etiology is noted for many
SGA infants, known causes include
fetal, placental, and maternal factors.
Maternal smoking is associated with
SGA newborns.

1.5

25

LGA infants may experience difficulties during birth. Infants of mothers
with diabetes are often LGA and may
have metabolic abnormalities shortly
after birth, as well as congenital
anomalies.

41

Term

43

45

Postmature

F I G U R E 1 8 - 7 . Level of intrauterine growth based on gestational age and birth
weight of liveborn, single, white infants. Point A represents a premature infant; point
B indicates an infant of similar birth weight who is mature but SGA. (Adapted from Sweet YA.
Classification of the low-birth-weight infant. In: Klaus MH, Fanaroff AA. Care of the High-Risk Neonate, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA:
WB Saunders; 1986. Reproduced with permission.)

The three babies shown in Figure 18-8 were all born at 32 weeks gestational age
and weighed 600 g (SGA), 1,400 g (AGA), and 2,750 g (LGA). Each of these
categories has a different mortality rate, highest for preterm SGA and LGA
infants, and lowest for term AGA infants.

C H A P T E R 18

Preterm AGA infants are more prone to
respiratory distress syndrome, apnea,
patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) with
left-to-right shunt, and infection. Preterm SGA infants are more likely to
experience asphyxia, hypoglycemia,
and hypocalcemia.

| Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

807

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

F I G U R E 1 8 - 8 . Infants who are small, average, and large for their gestational age.
(Reprinted with permission from Korones SB: High-Risk Newborn Infants: The Basis for Intensive Nursing Care, 4th ed. St. Louis:
CV Mosby; 1986.)

Assessment Several Hours After Birth
During the ﬁrst day of life, newborns should have a comprehensive examination.
Wait until 1 or 2 hours after a feeding, when the baby is most responsive, and ask the
parents to remain in the room. Follow the sequence shown on pp. 803–807. See
Techniques of Examination (p. 813) for details on examining newborns and infants.
Observe the undressed newborn. Note the newborn’s color, size, body proportions, nutritional status, and posture, as well as respirations and movements of
the head and extremities. Most normal, full-term newborns lie in a symmetric
position, with the limbs semiﬂexed and the legs partially abducted at the hip.

In breech babies (buttock first), the
knees are flexed in utero; in a frank
breech baby, the knees are extended
in utero. In both, the hips are flexed.

Note the baby’s spontaneous motor activity with ﬂexion and extension alternating between the arms and legs. The ﬁngers are usually ﬂexed in a tight ﬁst, but
may extend in slow athetoid posturing movements. You will observe brief tremors of the body and extremities during vigorous crying, and even at rest.

By 4 days after birth, tremors at rest
signal central nervous system disease
from various possible causes, ranging
from asphyxia to drug withdrawal.

Studies by Dr. T. Berry Brazelton and others have demonstrated the wide range
of abilities in newborns which are described below.11 Parents will be delighted
by these abilities.

Asymmetric movements of the arms
or legs at any time suggest central or
peripheral neurologic deficits, birth injury
(such as a fractured clavicle or brachial
plexus injury), or congenital anomalies.

What a Newborn Can Do
Core Elements11
● Newborns use all ﬁve senses. For example, they will look at human faces and
turn to a parent’s voice.
● Newborns are unique individuals. Marked diﬀerences exist in temperaments,
personality, behavior, and learning.
● Newborns interact dynamically with caregivers—a two-way street!

Newborns who do not demonstrate
these behaviors may have a neurologic condition, drug withdrawal, or a
serious illness such as infection.

(continued )

808

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

What a Newborn Can Do (continued )
Examples of Complex Newborn Behavior
Habituation
Ability to selectively and progressively shut out negative
stimuli (e.g., a repetitive sound)
Attachment
A reciprocal, dynamic process of interacting and bonding
with the caregiver
State regulation
Ability to modulate the level of arousal in response to different degrees of stimulation (e.g., self-consoling)
Perception
Ability to regard faces, turn to voices, quiet in presence of
singing, track colorful objects, respond to touch, and
recognize familiar scents

ASSESSING THE INFANT
Development
Physical Development. Physical growth during infancy is faster than at
any other age.12 By 1 year, the infant’s birth weight should have tripled and
height increased by 50% from weight and height at birth.

Newborns have surprising abilities, such as ﬁxing upon and following human
faces. Neurologic development progresses centrally to peripherally. Thus, newborns learn head control before trunk control and use of arms and legs before
use of hands and ﬁngers (Fig. 18-9).

Activity, exploration, and environmental manipulation contribute to learning. By
3 months, normal infants lift the head and clasp the hands. By 6 months, they roll
over, reach for objects, turn to voices, and possibly sit with support. With increasing peripheral coordination, infants reach for objects, transfer them from hand to
hand, crawl, stand by holding on, and play with objects by banging and grabbing.
At 1 year a child may be standing and putting objects in the mouth (Fig. 18-10).13

F I G U R E 1 8 - 9 . Sitting up is a
developmental milestone among
infants.

Cognitive and Language Development. Exploration fosters increased
understanding of self and environment. Infants learn cause and effect (e.g., shaking
a rattle produces sound), object permanence, and use of tools. By 9 months, they
may recognize the examiner as a stranger deserving wary cooperation, seek comfort
from parents during examinations, and actively manipulate reachable objects (e.g.,
your stethoscope). Language development proceeds from cooing at 2 months, to
babbling at 6 months, to saying one to three words by 1 year.14
Social and Emotional Development. Understanding of self and
family also matures. Social tasks include bonding, attachment to caregivers, and
trust that caregivers will meet their needs (Fig. 18-11). Temperaments vary.
Some infants are predictable, adaptable, and respond positively to new stimuli;
others are less so and respond intensely or negatively. Because environment
affects social development, observe the infant’s interactions with caregivers.
C H A P T E R 18

F I G U R E 1 8 - 1 0 . Children often
take their ﬁrst steps after one year.

| Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

809

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

Developmental Milestones During Infancy13
Birth

Physical

Cognitive/
Language

Social/
Emotional

1m

2m

4m

5m

Focuses
Rolls over
Fixes/follows
Grasps rattle
Head control
Works for toy

Sits

Responds
to sounds

3m

Coos

6m

7m

8m

9m

10 m

Pulls to stand
Crawls

Squeals

Dada/Mama
specific

12 m

Walks

2 words

Babbles
Regards face

11 m

3 words
Laughs

Smiles

Feeds self

Waves and
Uses spoon
plays peek-a-boo

Indicates wants

FIGURE 18-11.

Developmental milestones during infancy.

General Guidelines
Use developmentally appropriate methods such as distraction and play to examine the infant. Because infants pay attention to one thing at a time, it is relatively
easy to distract the infant from the examination as it is performed. You can use a
moving object, a ﬂashing light, a game of peek-a-boo (for older infants), tickling,
or any sort of noise.

If you cannot distract the infant or
engage the awake infant with an
object, your face, or a sound, consider
a possible visual or hearing deficit.

Tips for Examining Infants
Approach the infant gradually, using a toy or object for distraction.
Perform as much of the examination as possible with the infant in the parent’s lap.
● Speak softly to the infant or mimic the infant’s sounds to attract attention.
● If the infant is cranky, make sure he or she is well fed before proceeding.
● Ask a parent about the infant’s strengths to elicit useful developmental and
parenting information.
● Don’t expect to do a head-to-toe examination in a speciﬁc order. Work with
what the infant gives you and save the mouth and ear examination for last.
●
●

Start with the infant sitting or lying in
the parent’s lap (Fig. 18-12). If the infant
is tired, hungry, or ill, ask the parent to
hold the baby against the parent’s chest.
Make sure appropriate toys, a blanket,
or other familiar objects are nearby. A
hungry infant may need to be fed before
you initiate the examination.

Many neurologic conditions can be
diagnosed during this general part of
the examination. For example, you
can detect hypotonia, conditions
associated with irritability or signs of
cerebral palsy (see neurologic
examination below).
F I G U R E 1 8 - 1 2 . Start the exam
while the child is still on the parent’s lap.

Close observation of an awake infant sitting on the parent’s lap can reveal
potential abnormalities such as hypotonia or hypertonia, conditions with abnormal skin color, jaundice or cyanosis, jitteriness, or respiratory problems.
810

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Observe parent–infant interactions. Watch the parent’s affect when talking about
the infant. Note the parent’s manner of holding, moving, dressing, and comforting the infant. Assess and comment on positive interactions, such as the obvious
pride in the mother’s face in Figure 18-13.
Infants do not object to having their clothing removed. To keep yourself and
your surroundings dry, it is wise to leave the diaper in place throughout the
examination; remove it only to examine the genitals, rectum, and hips.
Testing for Developmental
Milestones. Because you want to
measure the infant’s best performance,
check milestones at the end of the
interview, just before the examination.
This “fun and games” interlude also
enhances cooperation during the
examination. Experienced clinicians can
weave the developmental examination
into the other parts of the examination. F I G U R E 1 8 - 1 3 . Children can have
The table on p. 810 shows some key fun during the developmental exam.
physical or motor, cognitive or language, and social–emotional milestones during
the ﬁrst year. As an example, the infant in Figure 18-13 can squeal and laugh and
interact with the examiner.

Observation of the infant’s communication with the parent can reveal
abnormalities such as developmental
delay, language delay, hearing deficits,
or inadequate parental attachment.
Likewise, such observations may identify maladaptive nurturing patterns
that may stem from maternal depression or inadequate social support.
Many disorders cause delays in more
than one milestone. For most children
with developmental delay, the causes
are unknown. Some known causes
include abnormality in embryonic development (e.g., prenatal insult); hereditary
and genetic disorders (e.g., inborn errors,
genetic abnormalities); environmental
and social problems (e.g., insufficient
stimulation); pregnancy or perinatal
problems (e.g., placental insufficiency,
prematurity); and childhood diseases
(e.g., infection, trauma, chronic illness).

The AAP recommends that health care providers use a standardized developmental screening instrument for infants as young as several months of age.15
Several developmental screening instruments have been tested widely and validated in many nations. In general, these instruments assess ﬁve critical domains
of infant/child development: gross motor, ﬁne motor, cognitive (or problem-solving),
communication, and personal/social domains of development. Pediatric health care
providers are recommended to use these standardized instruments periodically
during preventive health visits because they perform better than a clinician’s
physical examination in identifying developmental delays, which can often be
subtle and challenging to determine because of the wide spectrum of normal
development in children. These screening instruments are practical to use in
clinical settings and have reasonable sensitivity and speciﬁcity for identifying
developmental delays. Some useful developmental screening instruments
include the Ages and Stages Questionnaire (ASQ), the Early Language Milestone
Scale (ELM Scale-2), the Modiﬁed Checklist for Autism in Toddlers (MCHAT),
and the Parents’ Evaluation of Developmental Status (PEDS). Combined with
your ﬁndings on interview and physical examination, results from these screening tests can help determine an appropriate management strategy.

If a cooperative infant fails items on a
standardized screening instrument,
developmental delay is possible,
necessitating more precise testing
and evaluation.

Use these screening instruments as adjuncts to a comprehensive developmental
examination. Suspected delays warrant further examination. For babies born
prematurely, adjust expected developmental milestones for the gestational age up to
24 months.

As an example, an infant who was born
8 weeks prematurely at 32-week gestation
will have abnormal findings on developmental screening if expected milestones
are not adjusted for prematurity. At a visit
at 12 months of age, the infant should be
expected to have attained milestones
appropriate for a 10-month old.

C H A P T E R 18

An infant or toddler who has developmental skills that plateau or are out of
sequence may have autism or cerebral
palsy.

| Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

811

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

Health Promotion and
Counseling: Evidence and
Recommendations
The AAP and the group Bright Futures4 recommend health supervision visits for
infants at the following ages: at birth, at 3 to 5 days, by 1 month, and at 2, 4, 6,
9, and 12 months (Fig. 18-14). This is called the Infant Periodicity Schedule.
Health supervision visits provide opportunities to answer questions for parents,
assess the infant’s growth and development, perform a comprehensive physical
examination, and provide anticipatory guidance. Age-appropriate anticipatory
guidance includes healthy habits and behaviors, social competence of caregivers,
parenting techniques, family relationships, and community interactions.
Regular visits provide an opportunity to plot a course for healthy and successful
development. That infants generally are well during these visits enhances the
quality of the experience. Parents are usually receptive to suggestions about
health promotion which can have major, long-term inﬂuences on the child and
family. Strong interviewing skills are necessary as you discuss strategies to optimize the health and well-being of their infants. Adjust the content to the appropriate developmental level of the infant. As an exercise, review the critical
components of a health supervision visit for a 6-month-old.

F I G U R E 1 8 - 1 4 . Regular health
supervision serves many purposes.

Components of a Health Supervision Visit for a 6-Month-Old
Discussions with Parents
● Address parents’ concerns/questions
● Provide advice
● Obtain social history
● Assess development, nutrition,
sleep, elimination, safety, oral
health, family relationships,
stressors, parenting beliefs,
community factors
Developmental Assessment
● Use a standardized developmental
instrument to measure milestones
● Assess milestones by history
● Assess milestones by examination

812

Physical Examination
Anticipatory Guidance
Healthy Habits and Behaviors
● Perform a careful examination,
including growth parameters with ● Injury and illness prevention
Use infant seat, watch for rolling,
percentiles for age
caution on walkers, poisons,
Screening Tests
tobacco exposure
● Vision and hearing (by examination),
● Nutrition
possibly hematocrit and lead (if
Breastfeeding or bottle, solids, no
high risk), screen for social risk
juice, prevent choking, overfeeding
factors
● Oral health
Immunizations
No bottle in bed, ﬂuoride, brushing
● See schedule (AAP or CDC website)
teeth
Parent–Infant Interaction
● Promoting development (play,
reading, music, talking)
Family Relationships
● Time for self; babysitters
Community Interaction
● Child care, resources

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

Techniques of Examination
General Survey and Vital Signs
Measure the infant’s body size and vital signs. Tables on the World Health
Organization website (www.who.int) show norms for blood pressure, height,
weight, BMI (starting age 2 years), and head circumference. Compare vital signs
or body proportions with age-speciﬁc norms because they change dramatically as
children grow. Pediatric practitioners also assess pain regularly, using standardized
pain scales.

Variations beyond two standard deviations for age or above the 95th percentile or below the 5th percentile are
indications for more detailed evaluation. These deviations may be the first
and only indicators of disease (see
examples on the website tables).

Somatic Growth. Measurement of growth is one of the most important
indicators of infant health. Deviations may provide an early indication of an
underlying problem. Compare growth parameters with respect to normal values
for age and sex, as well as prior readings on the same child, to assess trends.
Conﬁrm abnormalities in somatic growth by repeat measurement to account for
potential measurement error.

Measure growth parameters carefully using consistent technique and, optimally,
the same scales to measure height and weight.
The most important tools for assessing somatic growth are the growth charts
which are published by the National Center for Health Statistics (www.cdc.
gov/nchsv)16 and also the World Health Organization (www.who.int).17 All
charts include height, weight, and head circumference for children up to
36 months and height and weight for children 2 to 18 years. Charts plotting
weight by length as well as BMI are also available. These growth charts have
percentile lines indicating the percentage of normal children above and below
the child’s measurement by chronologic age. Special growth charts are available
for use in infants born prematurely to correct for this result.

The AAP, NIH, and CDC now recommend that clinicians use the 2006 WHO International growth charts for children 0 to 23 months of age. CDC growth charts
should be used in the United States to assess growth in children 2 to 19 years of age.
Length. For children younger
than age 2 years, measure body length
by placing the child supine on a measuring board or in a measuring tray, as
shown in Figure 18-15. Direct measurement of the infant using a tape measure is inaccurate unless an assistant
holds the child still with hips and knees
extended. Velocity growth curves are
helpful for older children, especially
those who are suspected of having
endocrine disorders.

Although many healthy infants cross
percentiles on growth charts, a
sudden or significant change in
growth may indicate systemic disease
due to various possible organ systems
or inappropriate excess weight gain
usually due to overfeeding.
Abnormalities that can cause deviation from normal growth patterns
include chronic disease or prematurity.
Growth charts are also available for
children with specific conditions such
as Down syndrome or Turner syndrome.
Reduced growth velocity, shown by a
drop in height percentile on a growth
curve, may signify a chronic condition. Comparison with normal standards is essential because growth
velocity is normally less during the
second year than during the first year.

F I G U R E 1 8 - 1 5 . Accurate length
measurement requires careful assistance.

C H A P T E R 18

Chronic conditions causing reduced
length or height include neurologic,
renal, cardiac, gastrointestinal, and
endocrine disorders as well as cystic
fibrosis.

| Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

813

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Weight. Weigh infants directly with an infant scale. Infants should be
weighed naked or be clothed only in a diaper.

Failure to thrive is inadequate weight
gain for age. Common indicators are:
(a) growth <5th percentile for age;
(b) drop >2 quartiles in 6 months; or
(c) weight for length <5th percentile.
Causes include environmental or psychosocial factors and a variety of gastrointestinal, neurologic, cardiac,
endocrine, renal, and other diseases.

Head Circumference. The head
circumference should always be measured during the ﬁrst 2 years of life,
but measurement can be useful at
any age to assess growth of the head
(Fig. 18-16). The head circumference
in infants reﬂects the rate of growth of
the cranium and the brain.

A small head size may result from
premature closure of the sutures or
microcephaly, which may be familial
or due to chromosomal abnormalities,
congenital infections, maternal metabolic disorders, and neurologic insults.

F I G U R E 1 8 - 1 6 . Head circumference
is a vital metric during early childhood.

An abnormally large head size (>95th
percentile or 2 standard deviations
above the mean) is macrocephaly,
which may result from hydrocephalus,
subdural hematoma, or rare causes like
brain tumor or inherited syndromes.
Familial megaloencephaly (large head)
is a benign familial condition.

Vital Signs
Blood Pressure. Although obtaining accurate blood pressure readings in
infants is challenging (Fig. 18-17), this
measurement is nevertheless important
for some high-risk infants and should
be routinely performed after age 3 years.
You will need your skills in distraction
or play.
F I G U R E 1 8 - 1 7 . Practice is
required to accurately measure blood
pressure in early childhood.

An alternative to using the blood pressure cuff, and the most easily used measure
of systolic blood pressure in infants, is the Doppler method which detects arterial
blood ﬂow vibrations, converts them to systolic blood pressure levels, and transmits them to a digital read-out device.
Systolic blood pressure gradually increases throughout childhood. For example,
normal systolic pressure in males is about 70 mm Hg at birth, 85 mm Hg at
1 month, and 90 mm Hg at 6 months (see WHO or CDC website).

814

Causes of sustained hypertension in
newborns include renal artery disease
(stenosis, thrombosis), congenital renal
malformations, and coarctation of the
aorta.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Pulse. The heart rate of infants is more sensitive to the effects of illness,
exercise, and emotion than that of adults.

While sinus tachycardia may be
extremely rapid, a pulse rate that is
too rapid to count (usually >180/min)
may indicate paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (PSVT).

Heart Rates from Birth to 1 Year
Age

Average Heart Rate

Range

140
130
115

90–190
80–180
75–155

Birth–1 mo
1–6 mo
6–12 mo

Bradycardia may be from drug ingestion, hypoxia, intracranial or neurologic conditions, or, rarely, cardiac
dysrhythmia such as heart blockage.

You may have trouble obtaining an accurate pulse rate in a squirming infant.
Palpate the femoral arteries in the inguinal area or the brachial arteries in the
antecubital fossa, or auscultate the heart.
Respiratory Rate. As with heart rate, the respiratory rate in infants has a
greater range and is more responsive to illness, exercise, and emotion than that
of adults or older children. The rate of respirations per minute ranges between
30 and 60 in the newborn.

Extremely rapid and shallow respiratory rates are seen in newborns with
cyanotic cardiac disease and right-toleft shunting, and metabolic acidosis.

The respiratory rate may vary considerably from moment to moment in the
newborn, with alternating periods of rapid and slow breathing (called “periodic breathing”). The sleeping respiratory rate is most reliable. Respiratory rates
during active sleep compared with quiet sleep may be up to 10 breaths per minute faster. The respiratory pattern should be observed for at least 60 seconds to
asses both the rate and the pattern. In infancy and early childhood, diaphragmatic breathing is predominant; thoracic excursion is minimal.

Fever can raise respiratory rates in
infants by up to 10 respirations per
minute for each degree centigrade
of fever.

Commonly accepted cutoffs for deﬁning tachypnea are >60/min from birth to
2 months, and >50/min from 2 to 12 months.

Tachypnea and increased respiratory
effort in an infant are signs of lower
respiratory disease such as bronchiolitis or pneumonia.

Temperature. Because
fever is so common in infants
and children, obtain an accurate body temperature when
you suspect infection. Axillary and thermal-tape skin
temperature recordings in
infants and children are inaccurate. Auditory canal temperatures are accurate.

Fever (>38°C or >100.4°F) in infants
younger than age 2 to 3 months may
be a sign of serious infection or disease. These infants should be evaluated promptly and thoroughly.

Rectal temperatures are the F I G U R E 1 8 - 1 8 . Rectal thermometers are the
most accurate for infants. most accurate tool for infants.
The technique for obtaining a
rectal temperature is relatively simple. One method is illustrated in Figure 18-18.
Place the infant prone, separate the buttocks with the thumb and foreﬁnger on one

Potentially sick febrile infants under
3 months of age may have serious
bacterial infection and should have
temperatures assessed using a rectal
thermometer.

C H A P T E R 18

| Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

815

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

hand and with the other hand gently insert a well-lubricated rectal thermometer to
a depth of 2 to 3 cm. Keep the thermometer in place for at least 2 minutes.
Body temperature in infants and children is less constant than in adults. The
average rectal temperature is higher in infancy and early childhood, usually
above 99°F (37.2°C) until after age 3 years. Body temperature may ﬂuctuate as
much as 3°F during a single day, approaching 101°F (38.3°C) in normal children, particularly in late afternoon and after vigorous activity.

Anxiety may elevate the body temperature of children. Excessive bundling of
infants may elevate skin temperature
but not core temperature.
Temperature instability in a newborn
may result from sepsis, metabolic
abnormality, or other serious conditions. Older infants rarely manifest
temperature instability.

The Skin
Inspection. Examine the skin of the newborn or infant carefully to identify
both normal markings and potentially abnormal ones. The photos on pp. 818–820
demonstrate normal markings. The newborn’s skin has a unique characteristic
texture and appearance. The texture is soft and smooth because it is thinner than
the skin of older children. Within the ﬁrst 10 minutes after birth a normal newborn progresses from generalized cyanosis to pinkness. In lighter-skinned
infants, an erythematous ﬂush, giving the skin the appearance of a “boiled lobster,” is common during the ﬁrst 8 to 24 hours after which the normal pale pink
coloring predominates.

Some newborns with polycythemia
have a “ruddy” complexion. This is a
reddish purple color.

Vasomotor changes in the dermis and subcutaneous tissue—a response to cooling or chronic exposure to radiant heat—can produce a lattice-like, bluish mottled appearance (cutis marmorata), particularly on the trunk, arms, and legs. This
response to cold may last for months in normal infants. Acrocyanosis, a blue cast
to the hands and feet when exposed to cold (see p. 818), is very common in
newborns for the ﬁrst few days and may recur throughout early infancy. Occasionally in newborns, a remarkable color change (harlequin dyschromia) appears
with transient cyanosis of one half of the body or one extremity, presumably from
temporary vascular instability.

Cutis marmorata is prominent in
premature infants and in infants with
congenital hypothyroidism and Down
syndrome. If acrocyanosis does not
disappear within 8 hours or with
warming, cyanotic congenital heart
disease should be considered.

The amount of melanin in the skin of newborns varies, affecting pigmentation.
Black newborns may have a lighter skin color initially, except in the nail beds,
genitalia, and ear folds which are dark at birth. A dark or bluish pigmentation
over the buttocks and lower lumbar regions is common in newborns of African,
Asian, and Mediterranean descent. These areas, called slate blue patches, result
from pigmented cells in the deep layers of the skin; they become less noticeable
with age and usually disappear during childhood. Document these pigmented areas
to avoid later concern about bruising.

Central cyanosis in a baby or child of
any age should raise suspicion of congenital heart disease. The best area to
look for central cyanosis is the tongue
and oral mucosa, not the nail beds,
lips, or the extremities.

At birth, there is a ﬁne, downy growth of hair called lanugo over the entire body,
especially the shoulders and back. This hair is shed within the ﬁrst few weeks.
Lanugo is prominent in premature infants. Hair thickness on the head varies
considerably among newborns and is not predictive of later hair growth. All of

Pigmented light-brown lesions (<1 to
2 cm at birth) are café-au-lait spots.
Isolated lesions have no significance,
but multiple lesions with sharp borders
may suggest neurofibromatosis (see

816

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
the original hair is shed within months and is replaced with a new crop, sometimes of a different color.

Table 18-2, Common Skin Rashes and
Skin Findings in Newborns and Infants,
p. 911).

Inspect the newborn closely for a series of common skin conditions. At birth, a
cheesy white material called vernix caseosa, composed of sebum and desquamated
epithelial cells, covers the body. Some newborns have edema over their hands,
feet, lower legs, pubis, and sacrum; this disappears within a few days. Superﬁcial
desquamation of the skin is often noticeable 24 to 36 hours after birth, particularly in postterm babies (>40 weeks gestation), and it can last for 7 to 10 days.

Skin desquamation is normal in fullterm newborns but may rarely be a
sign of placental circulatory insufficiency or congenital ichthyosis.

You should be able to identify four common dermatologic conditions in newborns—miliaria rubra, erythema toxicum, pustular melanosis, and milia—which
are shown on p. 819. None of these is clinically signiﬁcant.

Both erythema toxicum and pustular
melanosis may appear similar to the
pathologic vesiculopustular rash of
herpes simplex or Staphylococcus
aureus skin infection.

Note any signs of trauma from the birth process and the use of forceps or suction;
these signs disappear but should prompt a careful neurologic examination.

Midline hair tufts over the lumbosacral spine region suggest a possible
spinal cord defect.

Jaundice. Carefully examine and touch the newborn’s skin to assess
the level of jaundice. Normal “physiologic” jaundice, which occurs in half
of all newborns, appears on the second or third day, peaks at about the ﬁfth
day, and usually disappears within a week (although it may persist longer
in breast-fed infants). Jaundice is best seen in natural daylight rather than
artiﬁcial light. Newborn jaundice appears to progress from head to toe, with
more intense jaundice on the upper body and less intense yellow color in
the lower extremities.

Jaundice within the first 24 hours of
birth may be from hemolytic disease of
the newborn.

To detect jaundice, apply pressure to the skin (Fig. 18-19) to press out the normal pink or brown color. A yellowish “blanching” indicates jaundice.

A common source of jaundice during
the first couple of weeks is breastfeeding jaundice, which resolves
around 10 to 14 days of life. Persistent
jaundice requires evaluation.

Late-appearing jaundice or jaundice
that persists beyond 2 to 3 weeks
should raise suspicions of biliary
obstruction or liver disease.

F I G U R E 1 8 - 1 9 . Pressing the red color from the skin allows better recognition
of the yellow of normal skin (left) or jaundice (right). (From Fletcher M. Physical Diagnosis in
Neonatology. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott-Raven; 1998.)

C H A P T E R 18

| Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

817

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Vascular Markings. A common vascular marking is the “salmon patch”
(also known as nevus simplex, “ﬂame nevi,” telangiectatic nevus, or capillary
hemangioma). These ﬂat, irregular, light pink patches (see p. 819) are most often seen on the nape of the neck (“stork bite”), upper eyelids, forehead, or upper
lip (“angel kisses”). They are not true nevi, but result from distended capillaries.
They often disappear by 1 year of age and are covered by the hairline.

A unilateral dark, purplish lesion, or
“port wine stain” over the distribution
of the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve may be a sign of
Sturge–Weber syndrome, which is
associated with seizures, hemiparesis,
glaucoma, and mental retardation.

Palpation. Palpate the newborn or infant’s skin to assess the degree of hydration, or turgor. Roll a fold of loosely adherent skin on the abdominal wall
between your thumb and foreﬁnger to determine its consistency. The skin in
well-hydrated infants returns to its normal position immediately upon release.
Delay in return is a phenomenon called “tenting” and usually occurs in children
with signiﬁcant dehydration.

Significant edema of the hands and
feet of a newborn girl may be suggestive of Turner syndrome. Other features such as a webbed neck would
reinforce this diagnosis.
Dehydration is a common problem in
infants. Usual causes are insufficient
intake or excess loss of fluids from
diarrhea.

Newborn Skin Findings
Finding/Description

Finding/Description

Common Nonpathologic Conditions

Acrocyanosis
This bluish discoloration usually appears in the palms and
soles. Cyanotic congenital heart disease can present with severe
acrocyanosis.

Jaundice
Physiologic jaundice occurs during days 2 to 5 of life and progresses from head to toe as it peaks. Extreme jaundice may
signify a hemolytic process or biliary or liver disease.

(continued )

818

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

Newborn Skin Findings (continued )
Finding/Description

Finding/Description

Common Benign Rashes

Miliaria Rubra
Scattered vesicles on an erythematous base, usually on the face
and trunk, result from obstruction of the sweat gland ducts; this
condition disappears spontaneously within weeks.

Erythema Toxicum
Usually appearing on days 2 to 3 of life, this rash consists of
erythematous macules with central pinpoint vesicles scattered diﬀusely over the entire body. They appear similar to
ﬂea bites. These lesions are of unknown etiology but disappear within 1 week of birth.

Pustular Melanosis
Seen more commonly in black infants, the rash presents at
birth as small vesiculopustules over a brown macular base;
these can last for several months.

Milia
Pinhead-sized smooth white raised areas without surrounding
erythema on the nose (seen here), chin, and forehead result from
retention of sebum in the openings of the sebaceous glands.
Although occasionally present at birth, milia usually appear
within the ﬁrst few weeks and disappears over several weeks.

Benign Birthmarks

Eyelid Patch
This birthmark fades, usually within the ﬁrst year of life.

Salmon Patch
Also called the “stork bite,” or “angel kiss,” this splotchy pink
mark fades with age.

(continued )

C H A P T E R 18

| Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

819

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

Newborn Skin Findings (continued )
Finding/Description

Finding/Description

Café-au-lait Spots
These light-brown pigmented lesions usually have borders and
are uniform. They are noted in more than 10% of black infants. If
more than ﬁve café-au-lait spots exist, consider the diagnosis of neuroﬁbromatosis (see Table 18-2, Common Skin Rashes and Skin Findings in Newborns and Infants, p. 911).

Slate Blue Patches
These are more common among dark-skinned babies. It is
important to note them so that they are not mistaken for
bruises.

The Head
At birth, a baby’s head may seem large relative to the body. A newborn’s head
accounts for one fourth of the body length and one third of the body weight;
these proportions change, so that by adulthood the head accounts for one eighth
of the body length and about one tenth of the body weight.

An enlarged posterior fontanelle may be
present in congenital hypothyroidism.

Sutures and Fontanelles. Membranous tissue spaces called sutures separate
the bones of the skull from one another. The areas where the major sutures intersect in the anterior and posterior portions of the skull are known as fontanelles.
Examine the sutures and fontanelles carefully (Fig. 18-20).

A bulging, tense fontanelle is
observed in infants with increased
intracranial pressure, which may be
caused by central nervous system infections, neoplastic disease, or hydrocephalus (obstruction of the circulation of
cerebrospinal fluid within the ventricles of the brain) (see Table 18-5,
Abnormalities of the Head, p. 913).

On palpation, the sutures feel like ridges and the fontanelles like soft concavities. The anterior fontanelle at birth measures 4 to 6 cm in diameter and usually
closes between 2 and 26 months of age (90% between 7 and 19 months). The
posterior fontanelle measures 1 to 2 cm at birth and usually closes by 2 months.

Early closure of the fontanelles can be
due to developing microcephaly or to
craniosynostosis or some metabolic
abnormalities.

Overlap of the cranial bones at the
sutures at birth, called molding, results
from passage of the head through the
birth canal; it disappears within 2 days.

Delayed closure of the fontanelles is
usually a normal variant, but can be
due to hypothyroidism, megalocephaly, increased intracranial pressure, or
rickets.

820

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Anterior fontanelle
Posterior fontanelle
Lambdoidal suture
Sagittal
suture
Coronal
suture
Metopic
suture

F I G U R E 1 8 - 2 0 . Sutures and fontanelles.

Carefully examine the fontanelle, because its fullness reﬂects intracranial pressure. Palpate the fontanelle while the baby is sitting quietly or being held upright.
Clinicians often palpate the fontanelles at the beginning of the examination. In
normal infants, the anterior fontanelle is soft and ﬂat. A full anterior fontanelle
with increased intracranial pressure is seen when a baby cries or vomits. Pulsations of the fontanelle reﬂect the peripheral pulse and are normal (and parents
often inquire about them). Learn to palpate the fontanelle because a bulging
fontanelle is concerning for increased intracranial pressure and a depressed
fontanelle may suggest dehydration.

A depressed anterior fontanelle may
be a sign of dehydration.

Inspect the scalp veins carefully to assess for dilatation.

Dilated scalp veins are indicative of longstanding increased intracranial pressure.

Skull Symmetry and Head Circumference. Carefully assess skull
symmetry (Fig. 18-21). Various conditions
can cause asymmetry; some are benign,
while others reﬂect underlying pathology.

A common type of localized swelling
of the scalp is a cephalohematoma,
caused by subperiosteal hemorrhage
from the trauma of birth. This swelling
does not cross over suture lines and
resolves within 3 weeks. As the hemorrhage resolves and calcifies, there
may be a palpable bony rim with a
soft center (see Table 18-5, Abnormalities of the Head, p. 913).

Look for asymmetric head swelling. A
newborn’s scalp may be swollen over the
occipitoparietal region. This is called
caput succedaneum and results from capillary distention and extravasation of
blood and ﬂuid resulting from the vacuum effect of rupture of the amniotic
sac. This swelling typically crosses suture
lines and resolves in 1 to 2 days.

F I G U R E 1 8 - 2 1 . Skull shape and
symmetry should be assessed.

The premature infant’s head at birth is relatively long in the occipitofrontal diameter and narrow in the bitemporal diameter (dolichocephaly). Usually, the skull
shape normalizes within 1 to 2 years.
C H A P T E R 18

| Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

821

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Pick up the infant and examine the skull shape from behind. Asymmetry of the
cranial vault (positional plagiocephaly) occurs when an infant lies mostly on one
side, resulting in a ﬂattening of the parieto-occipital region on the dependent
side and a prominence of the frontal region on the ipsilateral side. It disappears
as the baby becomes more active and spends less time in one position, and symmetry is almost always restored. Interestingly, the current trend to have newborns
sleep on their backs to reduce the risk for sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS)
has resulted in more cases of positional plagiocephaly (Fig. 18-22). This condition
can be prevented by frequent repositioning (providing “tummy time” when the
infant is awake).

Plagiocephaly may also reflect pathology such as torticollis from injury to
the sternocleidomastoid muscle at
birth or lack of stimulation of the
infant.

F I G U R E 1 8 - 2 2 . Careful
assessment may reveal plagiocephaly.

Measure the head circumference (p. 814) to detect abnormally large head size
(macrocephaly) or small head size (microcephaly), both of which may signify an
underlying disorder affecting the brain.

Premature closure of cranial sutures
causes craniosynostosis (p. 913) and
an abnormally shaped skull. Sagittal
suture synostosis causes a narrow
head from lack of growth of the
parietal bones.

Palpate along the suture lines. A raised, bony ridge at a suture line suggests craniosynostosis.
Palpate the infant’s skull with care. The cranial bones generally appear “soft” or
pliable; they will normally become ﬁrmer with increasing gestational age.

In craniotabes, the cranial bones feel
springy. Craniotabes can result from
increased intracranial pressure, as
with hydrocephaly, metabolic disturbances such as rickets, and infection
such as congenital syphilis.

Facial Symmetry. Check the face of infants for symmetry. In utero positioning may result in transient facial asymmetries. If the head is ﬂexed on the sternum, a shortened chin (micrognathia) may result. Pressure of the shoulder on the
jaw may create a temporary lateral displacement of the mandible.

Micrognathia may also be part of a
syndrome, such as the Pierre Robin
syndrome.

Examine the face for an overall impression of the facies; it is helpful to compare
with the face of the parents. A systematic assessment of a child with abnormalappearing facies can identify speciﬁc syndromes.18 The box on the next page
describes steps for evaluating facies.

822

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

Evaluating a Newborn or Child with
Possible Abnormal Facies
Carefully review the history, especially:
● Family history
● Pregnancy
● Perinatal history

Most developmental and genetic
syndromes with abnormal facies also
have other abnormalities.

Note abnormalities on other parts of the physical examination, especially:
● Growth
● Development
● Other dysmorphic somatic features

An infant with congenital hyperthyroidism may have coarse facial features and other abnormal facial
features (Table 18-6, Diagnostic Facies
in Infancy and Childhood, pp. 914–915).

Perform measurements (and plot percentiles), especially:
● Head circumference
● Height
● Weight
Consider the three mechanisms of facial dysmorphogenesis:
● Deformations from intrauterine constraint
● Disruptions from amniotic bands or fetal tissue
● Malformations from intrinsic abnormality in face/head or brain
Examine the parents and siblings:
● Similarity to a parent may be reassuring (e.g., large head) but may also be an
indication of a familial disorder

A child with abnormal shape or length
of palpebral fissures (see Table 18-6,
Diagnostic Facies in Infancy and
Childhood, pp. 914–915):
Upslanting (Down syndrome)
Downslanting (Noonan syndrome)
Short (fetal alcohol effects)

Try to determine whether the facial features ﬁt a recognizable syndrome,
comparing with:
● References (including measurements) and pictures of syndromes
● Tables/databases of combinations of features

Chvostek Sign. Percuss the cheek to check for Chvostek sign, which is present
in some metabolic disturbances and occasionally in normal infants. Percuss at
the top of the cheek just below the zygomatic bone in front of the ear, using the
tip of your index or middle ﬁnger.

A positive Chvostek sign produces
facial grimacing caused by repeated
contractions of the facial muscles. A
Chvostek’s sign is noted in cases of
hypocalcemic tetany, tetanus, and
tetany due to hyperventilation.

The Eyes
Inspection. Newborns keep their eyes closed except during brief awake periods. If you attempt to separate their eyelids, they will tighten them even more.
Bright light causes infants to blink, so use subdued lighting. Awaken the baby
gently and support the baby in a sitting position; often the eyes open.

A newborn who truly cannot open an
eye (even when awake and alert) may
have congenital ptosis. Causes include
birth trauma and third cranial nerve
palsy.

To examine the eyes of infants and young children, use some tricks to encourage
cooperation. Small colorful toys are useful as ﬁxation devices in examining the
eyes.

Subconjunctival hemorrhages are
common in neonates born via vaginal
delivery.

C H A P T E R 18

| Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

823

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Newborns may look at your
face and follow a bright light if
you catch them during an alert
period. Some newborns can
follow your face and turn their
heads 90° to each side. Examine infants for eye movements.
Hold the baby upright, supporting the head. Rotate yourself with the baby slowly in one
direction. This usually causes
the baby’s eyes to open, allowing you to examine the sclerae,
pupils, irises, and extraocular F I G U R E 1 8 - 2 3 . Carefully assess gaze and
movements (Fig. 18-23). The eye movements.
baby’s eyes gaze in the direction
you are turning. When the rotation stops, the eyes look in the opposite direction,
after a few nystagmoid movements.

Nystagmus (wandering or shaking
eye movements) persisting after a few
days or persisting after the maneuver
described on the left may indicate
poor vision or central nervous system
disease.

During the ﬁrst 10 days of life, the eyes may stare in one direction if just the head
is turned without moving the body (doll’s eye reﬂex).

Alternating convergent or divergent
strabismus persisting beyond
3 months, or persistent strabismus of
any type, may indicate ocular motor
weakness or another abnormality in
the visual system.

During the ﬁrst few months of life, some infants have intermittent crossed eyes
(intermittent alternating convergent strabismus, or esotropia) or laterally deviated
eyes (intermittent alternating divergent strabismus, or exotropia).
Look for abnormalities or congenital problems in the sclera and pupils. Subconjunctival hemorrhages are common in newborns and resolve within a
couple of weeks. The eyes of many newborns are edematous from the birth
process.

If a newborn fails to gaze at you and
follow your face during alert periods,
pay particular attention to the rest of
the ocular examination. The newborn
may have visual impairment from congenital cataracts or other disorders.

Colobomas may be seen with the
naked eye and represent defects in
the iris.

Observe pupillary reactions by response to light or by covering each eye with
your hand and then uncovering it. Although there may be initial asymmetry in
the size of the pupils, over time they should be equal in size and reaction to
light.
Inspect the irises carefully for abnormalities.

Brushfield spots (seen with an ophthalmoscope) are a ring of white
specks in the iris (see Table 18-7,
Abnormalities of the Eyes, Ears, and
Mouth, p. 916). Although sometimes
present in normal children, these
strongly suggest Down syndrome.

Examine the conjunctiva for swelling or redness. Most newborn nurseries use an
antibiotic eye ointment to help prevent gonococcal eye infection.
You will not be able to measure the visual acuity of newborns or infants. You can
use visual reﬂexes to indirectly assess vision: direct and consensual pupillary

824

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
constriction in response to light, blinking in response to bright light (optic
blink reﬂex), and blinking in response to quick movement of an object toward
the eyes. During the ﬁrst year of life, visual acuity sharpens as the ability to focus
improves. Infants achieve the following visual milestones:

Persistent ocular discharge and tearing beginning at birth may be from
dacryocystitis or nasolacrimal duct
obstruction.

Visual Milestones of Infancy
Birth19
1 month
1½–2 months
3 months

Blinks, may regard face
Fixes on objects
Coordinated eye movements
Eyes converge, baby reaches
toward a visual stimulus
Acuity around 20/60–20/80

Failure to progress along these visual
developmental milestones may indicate delayed visual maturation.

Ophthalmoscopic Examination. For the ophthalmoscopic examination,
with the newborn awake and eyes open, examine the red retinal (fundus) reﬂex
by setting the ophthalmoscope at 0 diopters and viewing the pupil from about
10 inches. Normally, a red or orange color is reﬂected from the fundus through
the pupil.

Congenital glaucoma may cause
cloudiness of the cornea. A dark light
reflex can result from cataracts, retinopathy of prematurity, or other disorders. A white retinal reflex (leukokoria)
is abnormal, and cataract, retinal
detachment, chorioretinitis, or retinoblastoma should be suspected.

A thorough ophthalmoscopic examination is difﬁcult in young infants but may
be needed if ocular or neurologic abnormalities are noted. The cornea can ordinarily be seen at +20 diopters, the lens at +15 diopters, and the fundus at 0
diopters.

Occlusion of the lens may represent a
cataract.

Examine the optic disc area as you would for an adult. In infants, the optic disc
is difﬁcult to visualize but is lighter in color, with less macular pigmentation. The
foveal light reﬂection may not be visible. Papilledema is rare in infants because
the fontanelles and open sutures accommodate any increased intracranial pressure, sparing the optic discs.

Small retinal hemorrhages may occur
in normal newborns. Extensive hemorrhages may suggest severe anoxia,
subdural hematoma, subarachnoid
hemorrhage, or trauma.

12 months

The Ears
The physical examination of the ears of infants is important because many
abnormalities can be detected, including structural problems, otitis media, and
hearing loss.
The goals are to determine the position, shape, and features of the ear and to detect
abnormalities. Note ear position in relation to the eyes. An imaginary line drawn
across the inner and outer canthi of the eyes should cross the pinna or auricle;
if the pinna is below this line the infant has low-set ears. Draw this imaginary
line across the face of the baby on p. 821; note that it crosses the pinna.

Small, deformed, or low-set auricles
may indicate associated congenital
defects, especially renal disease.

Otoscopic examination of the newborn’s ear can detect only patency of the ear
canal because accumulated vernix caseosa obscures the tympanic membrane for
the ﬁrst few days of life.
C H A P T E R 18

| Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

825

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

A small skin tab, cleft, or pit found just forward of the tragus represents a remnant of the ﬁrst branchial cleft and usually has no signiﬁcance. However, occasionally it may also be associated with renal disease and acquired hearing loss if
there is a family history of hearing loss.
The infant’s ear canal is directed downward from the outside; therefore, pull
the auricle gently downward, not upward, for the best view of the eardrum.
Once the tympanic membrane is visible, note that the light reﬂex is diffuse; it
does not become cone-shaped for several months.

Otitis media (see pp. 869–870) can
occur in infants.

The acoustic blink reﬂex is a blinking of the infant’s eyes in response to a sudden
sharp sound. You can produce it by snapping your ﬁngers or using a bell, beeper,
or other noisemaking device approximately 1 foot from the infant’s ear. Be sure you
are not producing an airstream that may cause the infant to blink. This reﬂex may
be difﬁcult to elicit during the ﬁrst 2 to 3 days of life. After it is elicited several times
within a brief period, the reﬂex disappears, a phenomenon known as habituation.
This crude test of hearing certainly is not diagnostic. Most newborns in the United
States undergo hearing screenings, which are mandatory in the majority of states.

Perinatal problems raising the risk for
hearing defects include birth weight
<1,500 g, anoxia, treatment with
potentially ototoxic medications, congenital infections, severe hyperbilirubinemia, and meningitis.

Signs That an Infant Can Hear
Age

Sign

0–2 mo

Startle response and blink to a sudden noise
Calming down with soothing voice or music
Change in body movements in response to sound
Change in facial expression to familiar sounds
Turning eyes and head to sound
Turning to listen to voices and conversation
Appropriate language development

2–3 mo

3–4 mo
6–7 mo

In the absence of universal hearing
screening, many children with hearing
deficits are not diagnosed until 2 years.
Clues to hearing deficits include parental concern about hearing, delayed
speech, and lack of developmental
indicators of hearing.

The Nose and Sinuses
The most important component of the examination of the infant nose is to test
for patency of the nasal passages. You can do this by gently occluding each nostril
alternately while holding the infant’s mouth closed. This usually will not cause
stress because most infants are nasal breathers. Some infants are obligate nasal
breathers and have difﬁculty breathing through their mouths. Do not occlude
both nares simultaneously, as this will cause considerable distress.
Inspect the nose to ensure that the nasal septum is midline.

The nasal passages in newborns may
be obstructed in choanal atresia. In
severe cases, nasal obstruction can be
assessed by attempting to pass a no. 8
feeding tube through each nostril into
the posterior pharynx. This is usually
done in the delivery room to assess
for choanal atresia.

At birth, the maxillary and the ethmoid sinuses are present. Palpation of the
sinuses of newborns is not helpful.

The Mouth and Pharynx
Use both inspection with a tongue depressor and ﬂashlight and palpation to inspect
the mouth and pharynx (Fig. 18-24). One method employs the parent to hold the
826

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

infant’s head and arms. The newborn’s
mouth is edentulous and the alveolar
mucosa is smooth with ﬁnely serrated
borders. Occasionally, pearl-like retention cysts are seen along the alveolar
ridges and are easily mistaken for teeth;
these disappear within 1 or 2 months.
Petechiae are commonly found on the
soft palate after birth.

Rarely, supernumerary teeth are noted.
These are usually dysmorphic and are
shed within days but are removed to
prevent aspiration.

F I G U R E 1 8 - 2 4 . Parental
assistance helps with oral assessment.

Palpate the upper hard palate to make sure it is intact. Epstein pearls, tiny white
or yellow, rounded mucous retention cysts, are located along the posterior midline of the hard palate. They disappear within months.
Cysts may be noted on the tongue or mouth. Thyroglossal duct cysts may open
under the tongue.
Infants produce little saliva during the ﬁrst 3 months. Older infants produce a
lot of saliva and drool frequently.
Inspect the tongue. The frenulum varies in tightness; sometimes it extends
almost to the tip and other times it is short, limiting protrusion of the tongue
(ankyloglossia or tongue tie).

Although unusual, a prominent, protruding tongue may signal congenital
hypothyroidism or Down syndrome.

You will often see a whitish covering on the tongue. If this coating is from milk,
it can be easily removed by scraping or wiping it away. Use a tongue depressor
or your gloved ﬁnger to wipe away the coating.

Oral candidiasis (thrush) is common in
infants. The white plaques are difficult
to wipe away and have an erythematous raw base (see Table 18-7, Abnormalities of the Eyes, Ears, and Mouth,
p. 916). They are found on the buccal
mucosa, palate, and tongue.

While there is a predictable pattern of tooth eruption, there is wide variation in the
age at which teeth appear. A rule of thumb is that a child will have 1 tooth for
each month of age between 6 and 26 months, up to a maximum of 20 primary
teeth.

Natal teeth are teeth that are present
at birth. They are usually simply early
eruptions of normal teeth, but they
can be part of syndromes.

The pharynx of the infant is best seen while the baby is crying. You will likely have
difﬁculty using a tongue depressor because it produces a strong gag reﬂex. Infants
do not have prominent lymphoid tissue so you will probably not visualize the
tonsils which increase in size as children grow.
Listen to the quality of the infant’s cry. Normal infants have a lusty, strong cry. The
following box lists some unusual types of infant cries.

C H A P T E R 18

Macroglossia is associated with several
systemic conditions. If associated with
hypoglycemia and omphalocele, the
diagnosis is likely Beckwith–Wiedemann
syndrome.

| Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

827

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

Abnormal Infant Cries (If Persistent)
Type

Possible Abnormality

Shrill or highpitched

Increased intracranial pressure. Also in newborns born to
narcotic-addicted mothers.

Hoarse

Hypocalcemic tetany or congenital hypothyroidism

Continuous
inspiratory
and expiratory
stridor

Upper airway obstruction from various lesions (e.g., a polyp
or hemangioma), a relatively small larynx (infantile laryngeal stridor), or a delay in the development of the cartilage
in the tracheal rings (tracheomalacia)

Absence of cry

Severe illness, vocal cord paralysis, or profound brain damage

A congenital fissure of the median
line of the palate is a cleft palate.
Inspiratory stridor beginning at birth
suggests a congenital abnormality as
described in this table. Stridor that
appears following birth can be due to
infections such as croup, a foreign
body, or gastroesophageal reflux.

The Neck
Palpate the lymph nodes of the neck and assess for any additional masses such as
congenital cysts (Fig. 18-25). Because the necks of infants are short, it is best to
palpate the neck while infants are lying supine, whereas older children are best
examined while sitting. Check the position of the thyroid cartilage and trachea.

Branchial cleft cysts appear as small
dimples or openings anterior to the
midportion of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. They may be associated
with a sinus tract.
Preauricular cysts and sinuses are common, pinhole-size pits, usually located
anterior to the helix of the ear. They
are often bilateral and may be associated with hearing deficits and renal
disorders.

Preauricular cyst
Parotid nodes
Epidermoid cyst
Occipital node
Jugulogastric
node

Retroauricular
(mastoid) nodes

Submandibular
node

Superior deep
cervical nodes
Middle deep
cervical nodes

Submental
node

Posterior
cervical nodes

Thyroglossal
duct cyst

Thyroglossal duct cysts are located at
the midline of the neck, just above the
thyroid cartilage. These small, firm,
mobile masses move upward with
tongue protrusion or with swallowing. They are usually detected after
2 years.
Congenital torticollis, or a “wry neck,”
is from bleeding into the sternocleidomastoid muscle during the stretching process during delivery. A firm
fibrous mass is felt within the muscle
2 to 3 weeks after birth and generally
disappears over months.

Cystic hygroma
2nd branchial
cleft cyst

Supraclavicular
node

Inferior deep
cervical nodes

Anterior
cervical nodes

F I G U R E 1 8 - 2 5 . Nodes and cysts of the head and neck.

828

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
In newborns, palpate the clavicles and look for evidence of a fracture. If present,
you may feel a break in the contour of the bone, tenderness, crepitus at the fracture site, and may notice limited movement of the arm on the affected side.

A fracture of the clavicle may occur during birth, particularly during delivery of
a difficult arm or shoulder extraction.

The Thorax and Lungs
The infant’s thorax is more rounded than that of adults. The thin chest wall has
little musculature; thus, lung and heart sounds are transmitted quite clearly. The
bony and cartilaginous rib cage is soft and pliant. The tip of the xiphoid process
often protrudes anteriorly, immediately beneath the skin.

Two types of chest wall abnormalities
noted in childhood include pectus excavatum, or “funnel chest,” and pectus carinatum, or “chicken breast deformity.”

Inspection. Carefully assess respirations and breathing patterns. Newborns,
especially those born prematurely, show periods of normal rate (30 to 40 per
minute) alternating respirations that may even cease for 5 to 10 seconds. This
alternating pattern of rapid and slow breathing is called “periodic respiration” or
“periodic breathing.”

Apnea is cessation of breathing for
more than 20 seconds. It is often
accompanied by bradycardia and may
indicate respiratory disease, central
nervous system disease, or, rarely, a
cardiopulmonary condition. Apnea
may be a high-risk factor for SIDS.

Do not rush to the stethoscope. Instead, observe the infant carefully as demonstrated in Figure 18-26, which demonstrates locations for retractions among
infants. Inspection is easiest when infants are not crying; thus, work with the
parents to settle the child. Observe for 30 to 60 seconds, note general appearance, respiratory rate, color, nasal component of breathing, audible breath
sounds, and work of breathing, as described below.

Supraclavicular retractions
Intercostal retractions

Substernal retractions
Subcostal retractions

FIGURE 18-26.

Anatomic locations of retractions (chest indrawing).

Because infants are obligate nasal breathers, observe their nose as they breathe.
Look for nasal ﬂaring. Observe breathing with the infant’s mouth closed or during
nursing or sucking on a bottle to assess for nasal patency. Listen to the sounds of
breathing; note any grunting, audible wheezing, or lack of breath sounds (obstruction).
Nasal ﬂaring, grunting, retractions, and wheezing are all signs of respiratory distress.

In newborns and young infants, nasal
flaring may be the result of upper
respiratory infections, with subsequent
obstruction of their small nares, but it
may also be caused by pneumonia or
other serious respiratory infections.

Observe two aspects of the infant’s breathing: audible breath sounds and work of
breathing. These are particularly relevant in assessing both upper and lower respiratory illness. Studies in countries with poor access to chest radiographs have

Lower respiratory infections, defined
as infections below the vocal cords,
are common in infants and include
bronchiolitis and pneumonia.

C H A P T E R 18

| Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

829

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

found these signs at least as useful as auscultation. Any of the abnormalities listed
below should raise concern about underlying respiratory pathology.
Observing Respiration—
Before You Touch the Child
Type of Assessment

Speciﬁc Observable Pathology

General appearance

Inability to feed or smile
Lack of consolability

Respiratory rate

Tachypnea (see p. 815), apnea

Color

Pallor or cyanosis

Nasal component of breathing

Nasal ﬂaring (enlargement of both nasal
openings during inspiration)

Audible breath sounds

Grunting (repetitive, short expiratory sound)
Wheezing (musical expiratory sound)
Stridor (high-pitched, inspiratory noise)
Obstruction (lack of breath sounds)

Acute stridor is a potentially serious
condition; causes include laryngotracheobronchitis (croup), epiglottitis,
bacterial tracheitis, foreign body, hemangioma, or a vascular ring.

Work of breathing

Nasal ﬂaring (excessive movement of nares)
Grunting (expiratory noises)
Retractions (chest indrawing):
Supraclavicular (soft tissue above clavicles)
Intercostal (indrawing of the skin between ribs)
Substernal (at xiphoid process)
Subcostal (just below the costal margin)

In infants, abnormal work of breathing
plus abnormal findings on auscultation
are the best findings for ruling in pneumonia. The best sign for ruling out pneumonia is the absence of tachypnea.

In healthy infants, the ribs do not move much during quiet breathing. Any outward movement is produced by descent of the diaphragm which compresses the
abdominal contents and in turn shifts the lower ribs outward.

Asymmetric chest movement may
indicate a space-occupying lesion.

Pulmonary disease causes increased abdominal breathing and can result in
retractions (chest indrawing), an indicator of pulmonary disease before 2 years
of age.

Chest indrawing is inward movement of the skin between the ribs during inspiration. Movement of the diaphragm primarily affects breathing with little assistance from the thoracic muscles. As mentioned in the preceding table, four types
of retractions can be noted in infants: suprasternal, intercostal, substernal, and
subcostal.

830

Airway obstruction or lower respiratory
tract disease in infants can result in the
Hoover sign, or paradoxical (seesaw)
breathing in which the abdomen
moves outward while the chest moves
inward during inspiration.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Thoracoabdominal paradox, inward movement of the chest and outward movement
of the abdomen during inspiration (abdominal breathing), is a normal ﬁnding in
newborns (but not older infants). It persists during active, or rapid eye movement
(REM), sleep even when it is no longer seen during wakefulness or quiet sleep
because of the decreased muscle tone of active sleep. As muscle strength increases
and chest wall compliance decreases with age, abdominal breathing should no
longer be noted. If observed, it may signify respiratory disease.

Children with muscle weakness may
be noted to have thoracoabdominal
paradox at several years of age.

Palpation. Assess tactile fremitus by palpation. Place your hand on the
chest when the infant cries or makes noise. Place your hand or ﬁngertips over
each side of the chest and feel for symmetry in the transmitted vibrations.
Percussion is not helpful in infants except in extreme instances. The infant’s
chest is hyperresonant throughout, and it is difﬁcult to detect abnormalities
on percussion.

Because of the excellent transmission
of sounds throughout the chest, any
abnormalities of tactile fremitus or on
percussion suggest severe pathology,
such as a large pneumonic consolidation.

Auscultation. After performing these maneuvers, you are ready for auscultation. Infant breath sounds are louder and harsher than those of adults because
the stethoscope is closer to the origin of the sounds. It is often difﬁcult to distinguish transmitted upper airway sounds from sounds originating in the chest.
Upper airway sounds tend to be loud, transmitted symmetrically throughout the
chest, and loudest as you move your stethoscope toward the neck. They are usually coarse inspiratory sounds. Lower airway sounds are loudest over the site of
pathology, are often asymmetric, and often occur during expiration.

Biphasic sounds imply severe obstruction from intrathoracic airway narrowing or severe obstruction from
extrathoracic airway narrowing.

Distinguishing Upper Airway from
Lower Airway Sounds in Infants
Technique

Upper Airway

Lower Airway

Compare sounds from
nose/stethoscope
Listen to harshness of
sounds
Note symmetry (left/right)
Compare sounds at different locations
(higher or lower)
Inspiratory vs. expiratory

Same sounds

Often diﬀerent sounds

Harsh and loud

Variable

Symmetric
Sounds are louder as
stethoscope is moved
up chest
Almost always inspiratory

Often asymmetric
Often sounds are louder
lower in chest toward
abdomen
Often has expiratory
phase

Expiratory sounds usually arise from an intrathoracic source, whereas inspiratory sounds can arise from an extrathoracic airway such as the trachea or from
an intrathoracic source. During expiration, the diameter of the intrathoracic airways decreases because radial forces from the surrounding lung do not “tether”
the airways open as occurs during inspiration. Higher ﬂow rates during inspiration produce turbulent ﬂow, resulting in appreciable sounds.

C H A P T E R 18

Diminished breath sounds in one side
of the chest of a newborn suggest
unilateral lesions (e.g., congenital diaphragmatic hernia or pneumothorax).

Upper respiratory infections are not
serious in infants but can produce
loud inspiratory sounds that are often
transmitted to the chest.

| Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

831

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

The characteristics of the breath sounds, such as vesicular and bronchovesicular, and
of the adventitious lung sounds, such as crackles, wheezes, and rhonchi, are the same
as those for adults, except that they may be more difﬁcult to distinguish in infants
and often occur together. Wheezes and rhonchi are common in infants. Wheezes,
often audible without the stethoscope, occur more frequently because of the smaller
size of the tracheobronchial tree. Rhonchi reﬂect obstruction of larger airways, or
bronchi. Crackles (rales) are discontinuous sounds (see p. 325), near the end of inspiration; they are usually caused by lung disorders and are far less likely to represent
cardiac failure in infants than in adults. They tend to be harsher than in adults.

Wheezes in infants occur commonly
from asthma or bronchiolitis.
Rhonchi in infants occur with upper
respiratory infections.

Crackles (rales) can be heard with
pneumonia and bronchiolitis.

The Heart
Inspection. Before examining the heart itself, observe the infant carefully for any
cyanosis. Acrocyanosis in the newborn is discussed on pages 816 and 918. It is
important to detect central cyanosis because it is always abnormal and because
many congenital cardiac abnormalities, as well as respiratory diseases, present with
cyanosis.20

Central cyanosis without acute
respiratory symptoms suggests cardiac
disease. See Table 18-9, Cyanosis in
Children, p. 918, and Table 18-10,
Congenital Heart Murmurs, pp. 919–920.

Recognizing minimal degrees of cyanosis requires care. Look inside the body
(i.e., the inside of the mouth, the tongue, or the conjunctivae) in addition to
assessing skin color. A true strawberry pink is normal, whereas any hint of
raspberry red suggests desaturation and requires urgent evaluation.
The distribution of the cyanosis should be evaluated. An oximetry reading will
conﬁrm desaturation.
Cardiac Causes of Central Cyanosis in
Infants and Children
Age of Onset

Potential Cardiac Cause

Immediately at birth

Transposition of the great arteries
Pulmonary valve atresia
Severe pulmonary valve stenosis
Possibly Ebstein malformation
All of the above plus:
Total anomalous pulmonary venous return
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome
Truncus arteriosus (sometimes)
Single ventricle variants
All of the above plus:
Pulmonary vascular disease with atrial,
ventricular, or great vessel shunting
(right-to-left shunting)

Within a few days after birth

Weeks, months, or years of life

Observe the infant for general signs of health. The infant’s nutritional status,
responsiveness, irritability, and fatigue are all clues that may be useful in evaluating cardiac disease. Note that noncardiac ﬁndings (see box on the next page) are
often present in infants with cardiac disease.
832

In general, cardiac causes of central
cyanosis involve right-to-left shunting
and can be caused by a variety of
congenital cardiac lesions.

The combination of tachypnea, tachycardia, and hepatomegaly in infants
suggests heart failure.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

Noncardiac Findings Commonly Present in
Infants with Cardiac Disease
Poor feeding
Failure to thrive
Irritability

Tachypnea
Hepatomegaly
Clubbing

Poor overall appearance
Weakness
Fatigue

Observe the respiratory rate and pattern to help distinguish the degree of illness
and cardiac versus pulmonary diseases. An increase in respiratory effort is
expected from pulmonary diseases, whereas in cardiac disease there may be
tachypnea without increased work of breathing (called “peaceful tachypnea”)
until heart failure becomes signiﬁcant.

A diffuse bulge outward of the left
side of the chest suggests longstanding cardiomegaly.

Palpation. Palpation of the chest wall will allow you to assess volume changes
within the heart. For example, a hyperdynamic precordium reﬂects a big volume
change.

The point of maximal cardiac impulse, or PMI, is not always palpable in infants and
is affected by respiratory patterns, a full stomach, and the infant’s positioning. It
is usually an interspace higher than in adults during the ﬁrst few years of life
because the heart lies more horizontally within the chest.

A “rolling” heave at the left sternal
border suggests an increase in right
ventricular work, whereas the same
kind of motion closer to the apex
suggests the same thing for the left
ventricle.

Thrills are palpable when turbulence within the heart or great vessels is transmitted to the surface. Knowledge of the structures of the precordium helps pinpoint
the origin of the thrill. Thrills are easiest to feel with your palm or the base of
your ﬁngers rather than your ﬁngertips. Thrills have a somewhat rough, vibrating quality. Figure 18-27 shows locations of thrills that occur in infants and
children from various cardiac abnormalities.

PDA is associated with hyperdynamic
precordium and bounding distal
pulses.

Aortic valve
stenosis

Pulmonary valve
stenosis
Severe right
ventricular
outflow tract
obstruction
at infundibular
level, tetralogy
of Fallot

Visible and palpable chest pulsations
suggest a hyperdynamic state from
either increased metabolic rate or
inefficient pumping as a result of an
underlying cardiac defect.

Ventricular
septal defect

FIGURE 18-27.

Location of thrills in infants and children.

C H A P T E R 18

| Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

833

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Pulses. The major branches of the aorta can be assessed by evaluation of
the peripheral pulses. All neonates should have an evaluation of all pulses at the
time of their newborn examination. In neonates and infants, the brachial artery
pulse in the antecubital fossa is easier to feel than the radial artery pulse at the wrist.
Both temporal arteries should be felt just in front of the ear.

The absence or diminution of femoral
pulses is indicative of coarctation of
the aorta. If you cannot detect femoral
pulses, measure blood pressures of
one of the lower and both upper
extremities. Normally, the blood pressure in the lower extremity is slightly
higher than in the upper extremities.
If they are equal or lower in the leg,
coarctation is likely to be present.

Palpate the femoral pulses. They lie in the midline just below the inguinal crease,
between the iliac crest and the symphysis pubis. Take your time to search for
femoral pulses; they are difﬁcult to detect in chubby, squirming infants. If you
ﬁrst ﬂex the infant’s thighs on the abdomen, this may overcome the reﬂex ﬂexion
that occurs when you then extend the legs.
Palpate the pulses in the lower extremities using your index or middle ﬁnger.
The dorsalis pedis and posterior tibial
pulses (Fig. 18-28) may be difﬁcult to
feel unless there is an abnormality
involving aortic run-off. Normal pulses
should have a sharp rise and should be
ﬁrm and well localized.

A weak or thready, difficult-to-feel
pulse may reflect myocardial dysfunction and heart failure, particularly if
associated with an unusual degree of
tachycardia.
Although the pulses in the feet of neonates and infants are often faint, several conditions can cause full pulses,
such as PDA or truncus arteriosus.
FIGURE 18-28.
lower extremity.

Palpating pulses in

As discussed on p. 814, carefully measure the blood pressure of infants and children (using an appropriate-sized infant blood pressure cuff) as part of the cardiac
examination.
Auscultation. You can evaluate the heart rhythm more easily in infants by
listening to the heart than by feeling the peripheral pulses; in older children
assess the rhythm either way.

Infants and children commonly have a normal sinus dysrhythmia, with the
heart rate increasing on inspiration and decreasing on expiration, sometimes
quite abruptly. This normal ﬁnding can be identiﬁed by its repetitive nature and
its correlation with respiration.

Many neonates and some older children have premature atrial or ventricular
beats that are often described as “skipped” beats. You can usually eradicate them
by increasing their intrinsic sinus rate through exercise such as crying in an
infant or jumping in an older child, although they may also be more frequent
in the postexercise period. In a completely healthy child, they are usually benign
and rarely persist.

The most common abnormal
dysrhythmia in infants is paroxysmal
atrial tachycardia (PAT). It can occur
at any age, including in utero. It is
remarkably well tolerated by some
infants and children and is found on
examination. The child may look
perfectly healthy or may be mildly
pale or with tachypnea. The heart rate
is sustained and regular at around
240 beats per minute or more. Some
children, particularly neonates, may
appear very ill. In older children, this
dysrhythmia is more likely to be truly
paroxysmal, with episodes of varying
duration and frequency.
Distant heart tones suggest pericardial
effusion; mushy, less distinct heart
sounds suggest myocardial dysfunction.

834

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Heart Sounds. Heart sounds are very challenging to assess in infants because they are rapid and often obscured by respiratory or other sounds. Nevertheless, evaluate the S1 and S2 heart sounds carefully and systematically. They
are normally crisp. You can usually hear the second sounds (S2) at the base
separately, but they should fuse into a single sound in deep expiration. In the
neonate, you should be able to detect a split S2 if you examine the infant when
the infant is completely quiet or asleep. Detecting this split eliminates many,
but not all, of the more serious congenital cardiac defects.

Pathologic arrhythmias in children
can be from structural cardiac lesions
but also from other causes such as
drug ingestion, metabolic abnormalities, endocrine disorders, serious
infections, and postinfectious states,
or conduction disturbances without
structural heart disease.

Characteristics of Normal Variants of
Heart Rhythms in Children

Characteristics
Most common age
Correlation with
respiration
Eﬀect of exercise on
tachycardia
Characteristic of
rhythm

Number of beats
Severity

Atrial Premature
Contractions (APCs)
or Ventricular
Premature
Contractions (VPCs)
Neonates (may occur at
any time)
No

Normal Sinus
Dysrhythmias
After infancy
Throughout childhood
Yes: Increases on inspiration,
decreases on expiration
Disappears

Eradicated by exercise
May be more frequent
postexercise
Skipped or missed beat
Irregularly occurring

Gradually faster with inspiration
Often suddenly slower on
expiration
Several beats, usually in
repetitive cycles
Benign (by deﬁnition)

Usually single abnormal
beats
Usually benign

In addition to trying to detect splitting of the S2, listen for the intensity of A2 and
P2. The aortic, or ﬁrst component of the second sound at the base, is normally
louder than the pulmonic, or second component (Fig. 18-29).

Inspiration

Expiration

A2

S1

P2

S2

FIGURE 18-29.
sounds in infants.

Although ventricular premature contractions generally occur in otherwise
healthy infants, they can occur with
underlying cardiac disease, particularly
cardiomyopathies and congenital heart
disorders. Electrolyte or metabolic disturbances are also causes.

S1

A louder-than-normal pulmonic component, particularly when louder than
the aortic sound, suggests pulmonary
hypertension.
Persistent splitting of S2 may indicate
a right ventricular volume load such
as atrial septal defect, anomalies of
pulmonary venous return, or chronic
anemia.

S2

Healthy heart

C H A P T E R 18

| Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

835

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

You may detect third heart sounds which are low-pitched, early diastolic sounds
best heard at the lower left sternal border, or apex; they reﬂect rapid ventricular
ﬁlling. These are frequently heard in children and are normal.

The third heart sound (S3) should be
differentiated from the higher-intensity
third heart sound gallop, which is a
sign of underlying pathology.

Fourth heart sounds represent decreased ventricular compliance, suggesting heart
failure.

Fourth heart sounds (S4), not often
heard in children, are low-frequency,
late diastolic sounds, occurring just
before the first heart sound.

You may also detect an apparent gallop (widely split S2 that varies), in the presence of a normal heart rate and rhythm. This is frequently found in normal
children and does not represent pathology.

A true gallop rhythm (in contrast to a
widely split S2 which gives an apparent
gallop)—tachycardia plus a loud S3, S4,
or both—is pathologic and indicates
heart failure (poor ventricular function).

Heart Murmurs. One of the most challenging aspects of the cardiac examination in children is the evaluation of heart murmurs. In addition to listening
to a squirming, perhaps uncooperative child, a major challenge is distinguishing
common benign murmurs from unusual or pathologic ones. Characterize heart
murmurs in infants and children by noting their speciﬁc location (e.g., left upper sternal border, not just left sternal border), timing, intensity, and quality. If
each murmur is delineated completely, the diagnosis is usually made clinically,
and laboratory tools such as ECG, chest x-ray, and echocardiography are needed
for conﬁrmation and better characterization.

An important rule of thumb is that, by deﬁnition, benign murmurs in children have
no associated abnormal ﬁndings. Many (but not all) children with serious cardiac
malformations have signs and symptoms other than a heart murmur obtainable on careful history or examination. Many have noncardiac signs and symptoms, including evidence of genetic defects that may offer helpful diagnostic
clues.

Any of the noncardiac findings that
frequently accompany cardiac disease
in children markedly raises the possibility that a murmur is pathologic.

Most children, if not all, will have one or more functional, or benign, heart murmurs before reaching adulthood.21–23 It is important to identify functional murmurs by their speciﬁc qualities rather than by their intensity. You will learn to
recognize the common functional murmurs of infancy and childhood, which
under most circumstances do not require evaluation.

Some pathologic murmurs of congenital heart disease are present at birth.
Others are not apparent until later,
depending on their severity, drop in
pulmonary vascular resistance following birth, or changes associated with
growth of the child. Table 18-10, Congenital Heart Murmurs, on pp. 919–920,
shows examples of pathologic murmurs of childhood.

The box on the next page characterizes two benign heart murmurs in infants
according to their locations and key characteristics.

836

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

Two Common Benign Murmurs in Infants
Pulmonary flow

Closing
ductus

Typical Age

Name

Characteristics

Newborn

Closing ductus

Transient, soft, ejection, systolic
Upper left sternal border

Newborn to 1 yr

Peripheral pulmonary
ﬂow murmur

Soft, slightly ejectile, systolic
Upper left sternal border, radiating to lung ﬁelds
and axillae
S1

Description and Location

S2

In some infants, you will detect a soft, somewhat ejectile murmur, not over the
precordium but over the lung ﬁelds, particularly in the axillae. This represents
peripheral pulmonary artery ﬂow and is partly the result of inadequate pulmonary artery growth in utero (when there is little pulmonary blood ﬂow) and the
sharp angle at which the pulmonary artery curves backward. In the absence of
any physical ﬁndings to suggest additional underlying diseases, this peripheral
pulmonary ﬂow murmur (which is common) can be considered benign and usually disappears by 1 year.

A pulmonary flow murmur in the
newborn with other signs of disease is
more likely to be pathologic. Diseases
may include Williams syndrome, congenital rubella syndrome, and Alagille
syndrome.

Physiologic Basis for Some Pathologic
Heart Murmurs
Change in Pulmonary Vascular Resistance

Heart murmurs that are dependent on a postnatal drop in pulmonary vascular resistance, allowing turbulent ﬂow from the high-pressure systemic circuit to the lowerpressure pulmonary circuit, are not audible until such a drop has occurred. Except in
premature infants, murmurs of a ventricular septal defect or PDA are not heard in the
ﬁrst few days of life and usually become audible after a week to 10 days.

Characteristics of specific pathologic
heart murmurs in children are
described in Table 18-10, Congenital
Heart Murmurs, pp. 919–920.

Obstructive Lesions

Obstructive lesions, such as pulmonic and aortic stenosis, are caused by normal
blood ﬂow through two small valves. They are not dependent on a drop in pulmonary vascular resistance. They are audible at birth.
(continued )

C H A P T E R 18

| Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

837

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Physiologic Basis for Some Pathologic
Heart Murmurs (continued )
Pressure Gradient Differences

Murmurs of atrioventricular valve regurgitation are audible at birth because of the
high-pressure gradient between the ventricle and its atrium.
Changes Associated with Growth of Children

Some murmurs do not follow the patterns above, but become audible because
of alterations in normal blood ﬂow that occur with growth. For example, even
though it is an obstructive defect, aortic stenosis may not be audible until considerable growth has occurred and is frequently not heard until adulthood, although
a congenitally abnormal valve is responsible. Similarly, the pulmonary ﬂow murmur of an atrial septal defect may not be heard for a year or more because right
ventricular compliance gradually increases and the shunt becomes larger, eventually producing a murmur caused by too much blood ﬂow across a normal pulmonic
valve.

When you detect a murmur in a child, note all of the qualities as described in
Chapter 9, The Cardiovascular System, to help you distinguish pathologic murmurs
from benign murmurs. Heart murmurs that reﬂect underlying structural heart
disease are easier to evaluate if you have a good knowledge of intrathoracic anatomy and the functional cardiac changes following birth and if you understand the
physiologic basis for heart murmurs. Understanding these physiologic changes can
help you distinguish pathologic murmurs from benign heart murmurs in children.

A newborn with a heart murmur and
central cyanosis is likely to have congenital heart disease and requires
urgent cardiac evaluation.

The Breasts
The breasts of the newborn in both males and females are often enlarged from
maternal estrogen effect; this may last several months. The breasts may also be
engorged with a white liquid, sometimes colloquially called “witch’s milk,” which
may last 1 or 2 weeks.

In premature thelarche, breast development occurs, most often between
6 months and 2 years. Other signs of
puberty or hormonal abnormalities
are not present.

The Abdomen
Inspection. Inspect the abdomen with the infant lying supine (and, optimally,
asleep). The infant’s abdomen is protuberant as a result of poorly developed
abdominal musculature. You will easily notice abdominal wall blood vessels and
intestinal peristalsis.

Inspect the newborn’s umbilical cord to detect abnormalities. Normally, there are
two thick-walled umbilical arteries and one larger but thin-walled umbilical vein
which is usually located at the 12 o’clock position.

A single umbilical artery may be associated with congenital anomalies or
be an isolated anomaly.

The umbilicus in the newborn may have a long cutaneous portion (umbilicus
cutis) which is covered with skin, and an amniotic portion (umbilicus amnioticus)
which is covered by a ﬁrm gelatinous substance. The amniotic portion dries up
and falls off within 2 weeks, whereas the cutaneous portion retracts to be ﬂush
with the abdominal wall.

An umbilical granuloma at the base of
the navel is the development of pink
granulation tissue formed during the
healing process.

838

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Inspect the area around the umbilicus for redness or swelling.

Infection of the umbilical stump
(omphalitis) can be a serious condition and is characterized by periumbilical edema and erythema.

Umbilical hernias are detectable by a few weeks of age. Most disappear by 1 year,
nearly all by 5 years.

Umbilical hernias in infants are caused
by a defect in the abdominal wall
and can be quite protuberant with
increased intra-abdominal pressure
(i.e., during crying).

In some normal infants, you will notice a diastasis recti. This involves separation
of the two rectus abdominis muscles, causing a midline ridge most apparent
when the infant contracts the abdominal muscles. A benign condition in most
cases, it resolves during early childhood.
Auscultation. Auscultation of a quiet infant’s abdomen is easy. You may hear
an orchestra of musical tinkling bowel sounds upon placement of your stethoscope on the infant’s abdomen.

An increase in pitch or frequency of
bowel sounds is heard with gastroenteritis or, rarely, with intestinal obstruction.

Percussion and Palpation. You can percuss an infant’s abdomen as you
would an adult’s, but may note greater tympanitic sounds because of the infant’s
propensity to swallow air. Percussion is useful for determining the size of organs
and abdominal masses.

A silent, tympanic, distended, and
tender abdomen suggests peritonitis.

It is easy to palpate an infant’s abdomen because infants like being touched. A
useful technique to relax the infant is to hold the legs ﬂexed at the knees and
hips with one hand and palpate the abdomen with the other. A paciﬁer may
quiet the infant in this position.
When palpating the liver, start gently low in the abdomen, moving upward with
your ﬁngers. This technique helps to identify an extremely enlarged liver that
extends down into the pelvis. With a careful examination, you can feel the liver
edge in most infants, 1 to 3 cm below the right costal margin.

An enlarged, tender liver may be due
to heart failure or due to storage diseases. Among newborns, causes of
hepatomegaly include hepatitis, storage diseases, vascular congestion, and
biliary obstruction.

One technique for assessing liver size in infants is simultaneous percussion and
auscultation.24 Percuss and simultaneously auscultate, noting a change in sound
as you percuss over the liver or beyond it. Of note, a scratch test (described on
page 880 for older children) can be attempted in infants.

Liver Size in Healthy Term Newborns
By palpation and percussion25
Projection below right costal margin

Mean, 5.9 ± 0.7 cm
Mean, 2.5 ± 1.0 cm

C H A P T E R 18

| Assessing Children: Infancy through Adolescence

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

839

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

The spleen, like the liver, is felt easily in most infants. It is soft with a sharp edge
and it projects downward like a tongue from under the left costal margin. The
spleen is moveable and rarely extends more than 1 to 2 cm below the left costal
margin.

Several diseases can cause splenomegaly, including infections, hemolytic anemias, infiltrative disorders,
inflammatory or autoimmune diseases,
and portal hypertension.

Palpate the other abdominal structures. You will commonly note pulsations in the
epigastrium caused by the aorta. This is felt on deep palpation to the left of the
midline.

Abnormal abdominal masses in
infants can be associated with the
kidney (e.g., hydronephrosis), bladder
(e.g., urethral obstruction), bowel
(e.g., Hirschsprung disease, or
intussusception), and tumors.

You may be able to palpate the kidneys of infants by carefully placing the ﬁngers
of one hand in front of and those of the other behind each kidney. The descending colon is a sausage-like mass in the left lower quadrant.
Once you have identiﬁed the normal structures in the infant’s abdomen, use
palpation to identify abnormal masses.

In pyloric stenosis, deep palpation in the
right upper quadrant or midline can
reveal an “olive,” or a 2-cm firm pyloric
mass. While feeding, some infants with
this condition will have visible peristaltic waves pass across their abdomen,
followed by projectile vomiting. Infants
present at about 4 to 6 weeks of age.

Male Genitalia
Inspect the male genitalia with the infant supine noting the appearance of the
penis, testes, and scrotum. The foreskin completely covers the glans penis. It is
nonretractable at birth though you may be able to retract it enough to visualize
the external urethral meatus. The foreskin gradually loosens over months to
years and becomes retractable. The rate of circumcision had declined over several
decades in North America and varies worldwide, depending on cultural practices,
but is now recommended by the AAP and by experts in many parts of the world
due to reduced rates of HIV and other infections among circumcised males.

Hypospadias refers to an abnormal
location of the urethral orifice to some
point along the ventral surface of the
glans or shaft of the penis (see
Table 18-12, The Male Genitourinary
System, p. 922). The foreskin is
incompletely formed ventrally.

Inspect the shaft of the penis, noting any abnormalities on the ventral surface.
Make sure the penis appears straight.

A fixed, downward bowing of the
penis is a chordee; this may accompany a hypospadias.

Inspect the scrotum noting rugae which should be present by 40 weeks gestation.
Scrotal edema may be present for several days following birth because of the
effect of maternal estrogen.
Palpate the testes in the scrotal sacs, proceeding downward from the external
inguinal ring to the scrotum. If you feel a testis up in the inguinal canal, gently
milk it downward into the scrotum. The newborn’s testes should be about
10 mm in width and 15 mm in length and should lie in the scrotal sacs most
of the time.

840

In newborns with an undescended testicle (cryptorchidism), the scrotum often
appears underdeveloped and tight,
and palpation reveals an absence of
scrotal contents (see Table 18-12, The
Male Genitourinary System, p. 922).

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

