http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

C H A P T E R

12

The Peripheral Vascular
System
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (Vol. 11: Peripheral Vascular System)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com

Careful assessment is essential for detection of diseases of the peripheral arteries
(Fig. 12-1) and veins. Peripheral artery disease (PAD) is generally deﬁned as atherosclerotic disease distal to the aortic bifurcation, although some guidelines also
include the abdominal aorta.1,2 PAD affects roughly 8 million Americans, with
estimates ranging from 5.8% to 12% of the population older than age 40 years,
but is “silent” in 20% to 50% of those affected.1–3 Prevalence increases with age,
rising from 7% of adults aged 60 to 69 years to 23% of adults 80 years of age and
older.4 Detection is doubly important because PAD is both a marker for cardiovascular morbidity and mortality, and a harbinger of functional decline. Risk of
death from myocardial infarction and stroke triples in adults with PAD. In 2013,
the American College of Cardiology Foundation and the American Heart Association updated their PAD guidelines from 2005 and 2011 to promote improved
screening and prevention.2,5

Adventitia
Media
Intima

Endothelium
Smooth muscle

FIGURE 12-1.

Anatomy of arteries.

C H A P T E R 12

| The Peripheral Vascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

509

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Thromboembolic disorders of the peripheral venous system in the lower extremities are also common, seen in an estimated 1% of adults aged 60 years and
above.6,7 Roughly two thirds of affected patients present with deep venous
thrombosis (DVT), often in hospital settings, and one third with pulmonary
thromboembolism (PE).8,9 Almost one quarter of PE cases present with sudden
death.6 Superﬁcial venous thrombosis also poses risks—one third of those
affected are diagnosed with DVT or PE.10 In addition, DVT in the upper extremity now represents about 10% of the cases of DVT, reﬂecting complications from
increased placement of central venous catheters, cardiac pacemakers, and
deﬁbrillators.11

Anatomy and Physiology
Arteries
Arteries contain three concentric layers of tissue: the intima, the media, and the
adventitia (Figs. 12-1 and 12-2). The internal elastic membrane borders the
intima and the media; the external elastic membrane separates the media from
the adventitia.

Atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory disease initiated by injury to vascular endothelial cells, provoking
atheromatous plaque formation and
the vascular lesions of hypertension.
Cross
section

Longitudinal
section

Atheroma
(fatty layer)

F I G U R E 1 2 - 2 . Arterial atheromas.

Intima. Surrounding the lumen of all blood vessels is the intima, a single
continuous lining of endothelial cells with remarkable metabolic properties.12
Intact endothelium synthesizes regulators of thrombosis such as prostacyclin,
plasminogen activator, and heparin-like molecules. It produces prothrombotic
molecules such as von Willebrand factor and plasminogen activator inhibitor. It
modulates blood ﬂow and vascular reactivity through synthesis of vasoconstrictors
like endothelin and angiotensin-converting enzyme, and vasodilators such as
nitric oxide and prostacyclin. The intimal endothelium also regulates immune
and inﬂammatory reactions through elaboration of interleukins, adhesion
molecules, and histocompatibility antigens.

510

Atheroma formation begins in the
intima, where circulating lipoproteins,
especially low-density lipoproteins
(LDLs), are exposed to proteoglycans
from the extracellular matrix, undergo
oxidative modification, and trigger a
local inflammatory response that
attracts mononuclear phagocytes.
Once in the intima, phagocytes
mature into macrophages, ingest
lipids, and become foam cells that
develop into fatty streaks.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

Atheroma Formation
In complex atheromas, there is a proliferation of smooth muscle cells and
extracellular matrix that breaches the endothelial lining.
● Complex atheromas contain a ﬁbrous cap of smooth muscle cells that overlies
a necrotic lipid-rich core, vascular cells, and a wide range of immune cells and
prothrombotic molecules.
● Inﬂammatory mediators that alter collagen repair and cap ﬁbrosis are increasingly implicated in plaque rupture and plaque erosion, which expose thrombogenic factors in the plaque core to coagulation factors in the blood.

Investigators place increasing emphasis on plaque activation, in addition to
luminal stenosis, as a major precipitant of ischemia and infarction.13–15

●

Media. The media is composed of smooth muscle cells that dilate and
constrict to accommodate blood pressure and ﬂow. Its inner and outer
boundaries consist of elastic ﬁbers, or elastin, and are called internal and external
elastic laminae, or membranes. Small arterioles called the vasa vasorum perfuse
the media.
Adventitia. The outer layer of the artery is the adventitia, the connective
tissue containing nerve ﬁbers and the vasa vasorum.
Arterial Branching. Arteries must respond to the variations in cardiac
output during systole and diastole. Their anatomy and size vary according to
their distance from the heart. The aorta and its immediate branches are large
highly elastic arteries such as the common carotid and iliac arteries. These
arteries course into medium-sized muscular arteries such as the coronary and
renal arteries. The elastic recoil and smooth muscle contraction and relaxation
in the media of large and medium-sized arteries produce arterial pulsatile
ﬂow. Medium-sized arteries divide into small arteries less than 2 mm
in diameter and even smaller arterioles with diameters from 20 to 100 μm
(sometimes termed “microns”). Resistance to blood ﬂow occurs primarily in the
arterioles. Recall that resistance is inversely proportional to the vessel radius,
known as the law of Laplace. From the arterioles, blood ﬂows into the vast
network of capillaries, each the diameter of a single red blood cell, only 7 to 8 μm
across. Capillaries have an endothelial cell lining, but no media, facilitating rapid
diffusion of oxygen and carbon dioxide.
Arterial Pulses.
body surface.

If a major artery is obstructed, anastomoses between branching networks
of smaller arteries can increase in size
over time to form collateral circulation
that perfuses structures distal to the
occlusion.

Arterial pulses are palpable in arteries lying close to the

C H A P T E R 12

| The Peripheral Vascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

511

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Pulses in the Arms and Hands.
In the arms, locate pulsations in the
arteries shown in Figure 12-3:
■ The brachial artery at the bend of the

elbow just medial to the biceps tendon
■ The radial artery on the lateral ﬂexor

Brachial artery

surface
■ The ulnar artery on the medial ﬂexor

surface, although overlying tissues
may obscure pulsations in the ulnar
artery

Radial artery
Ulnar artery

Two vascular arches within the hand
interconnect the radial and ulnar arteries,
doubly protecting circulation to the hand
and ﬁngers against possible arterial occlusion.

Arterial arches

FIGURE 12-3.

Arteries of the arm.

Pulses in the Abdomen. In the abdomen, locate the pulsations of the
aorta in the epigastrium (Fig. 12-4). Not palpable are its three important deeper
branches, the celiac trunk and the superior and inferior mesenteric arteries,
which perfuse the important organs of the abdominal cavity.
Thoracic aorta

Celiac artery (to foregut)

Superior mesenteric
artery (to midgut)

Inferior mesenteric
artery (to hindgut)
Abdominal aorta

Anterior view

FIGURE 12-4.

512

Abdominal aorta and its branches.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
■ Celiac trunk: esophagus, stomach, proximal duodenum, liver, gallbladder,

pancreas, spleen (foregut)
■ Superior mesenteric artery: small intestine—jejunum, ileum, cecum; large

intestine—ascending and transverse colon, right splenic ﬂexure (midgut)
■ Inferior mesenteric artery: large intestine—descending and sigmoid colon,

proximal rectum (hindgut)
Pulses in the Legs. As shown in Figure 12-5, in the legs, palpate pulsations in:

Despite the rich collateral network
that protects the three branches
against hypoperfusion, occlusion of
the mesenteric arteries can result in
bowel ischemia and infarction.
Anterior
superior
iliac spine

■ The femoral artery just below the inguinal ligament, midway between the
Inguinal
ligament

anterior superior iliac spine and the symphysis pubis
■ The popliteal artery, an extension of the femoral artery that passes medially

behind the femur, palpable just behind the knee. The popliteal artery divides
into the two arteries perfusing the lower leg and foot, listed below

Femoral
artery
Symphysis
pubis

■ The dorsalis pedis (DP) artery on the dorsum of the foot just lateral to the

extensor tendon of the big toe
■ The posterior tibial (PT) artery lies behind the medial malleolus of the ankle.

An interconnecting arch between its two chief arterial branches protects circulation to the foot.

Popliteal
artery

Veins
Unlike arteries, veins are thin-walled and highly distensible, with a capacity for
containing up to two thirds of circulating blood ﬂow. The venous intima consists
of nonthrombogenic endothelium. Protruding into the lumen are unidirectional
valves that promote venous return to the heart. The media contains circumferential rings of elastic tissue and smooth muscle that change vein caliber in response
to even minor changes in venous pressure. The smallest veins, or venules, drain
capillary beds and form interconnecting venous plexuses such as the prostatic
and the rectal venous plexuses.
Veins from the arms, upper trunk, and head and neck drain into the superior vena
cava, which empties into the right atrium. Veins from the abdominal viscera,
lower trunk, and legs drain into the inferior vena cava, except for circulation
through the liver. The portal vein, at the conﬂuence of the nutrient-rich superior
mesenteric and splenic veins, supplies ∼75% of the blood ﬂow to the liver, supplemented by oxygenated blood from the hepatic artery. Blood from these vessels
ﬂows into the hepatic sinusoids, then drains into three large hepatic veins that
empty into the inferior vena cava. Because of their weaker wall structure, the
leg veins are susceptible to irregular dilatation, compression, ulceration, and
invasion by tumors, and warrant special attention.

Posterior
tibial
artery
Dorsalis
pedis
artery
Arterial arch

F I G U R E 1 2 - 5 . Arteries of the leg.

Deep and Superﬁcial Venous System of the Legs. The deep veins
of the legs carry approximately 90% of the venous return from the lower
extremities. They are well supported by surrounding tissues.
C H A P T E R 12

| The Peripheral Vascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

513

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
In contrast, the superﬁcial veins are subcutaneous,
with relatively poor tissue support (Fig. 12-6). They
include:

Femoral vein

■ The great saphenous vein, which originates on

the dorsum of the foot, passes just anterior
to the medial malleolus, continues up the
medial aspect of the leg, and joins the femoral
vein of the deep venous system below the inguinal ligament

Great
saphenous
vein

■ The small saphenous vein, which begins on the

lateral side of the foot, passes upward along the
posterior calf, and joins the deep venous system
in the popliteal fossa
Small
saphenous
vein

FIGURE 12-6.

Anastomotic veins connect the two saphenous veins
and are readily visible when dilated. Bridging or
perforating veins connect the superﬁcial system with
the deep system (Fig. 12-7).
When competent, the one-way valves of the deep,
superﬁcial, and perforating veins propel blood
toward the heart, preventing pooling, venous stasis,
and backward ﬂow. Contraction of the calf muscles
during walking serves as a venous pump, also propelling blood upward against gravity.

Superﬁcial veins of the leg.

Femoral
vein
Great
saphenous
vein
Perforating
vein

Small
saphenous
vein

F I G U R E 1 2 - 7 . Deep, superﬁcial, and
perforating veins of the leg.

514

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

The Lymphatic System
The lymphatic system is an extensive vascular network that drains lymph ﬂuid
from body tissues and returns it to the venous circulation. Networks of lymphatic
capillaries, the lymphatic plexuses, originate in the extracellular spaces, where
the capillaries collect tissue ﬂuid, plasma proteins, cells, and cellular debris via
their porous endothelium, which lacks even a basement membrane. The
lymphatic capillaries continue centrally as thin vascular channels, then as
collecting ducts, and empty into the major veins at the neck. The right lymphatic
duct drains ﬂuid from the right side of the head, neck, thorax, and right upper
limb and empties into the junction of the right internal jugular and the right
subclavian veins. The thoracic duct collects lymph ﬂuid from the rest of the body
and empties into the junction of the left internal jugular and the left subclavian
veins. Lymph ﬂuid transported through these channels is ﬁltered through lymph
nodes interposed along the way.
Lymph Nodes. Lymph nodes are round, oval, or bean-shaped structures
that vary in size according to their location. Some lymph nodes, such as the
preauricular nodes, if palpable at all, are typically very small. The inguinal nodes,
by contrast, are relatively larger—often 1 cm in diameter and occasionally even
2 cm in an adult.

In addition to its vascular functions, the lymphatic system plays
an important role in the body’s
immune system. Cells within the
lymph nodes engulf cellular
debris and bacteria and produce
antibodies.

Infraclavicular
node

Only the superﬁcial lymph nodes
are accessible to physical examination. These include the cervical
nodes (p. 259), the axillary nodes
(p. 421), and nodes in the arms
and legs.
Epitrochlear
Recall that the axillary lymph
nodes
Lateral axillary
nodes drain most of the arm
nodes
(Fig. 12-8). Lymphatics from the
Central axillary
ulnar surface of the forearm and
nodes
hand, the little and ring ﬁngers,
and the adjacent surface of the
F I G U R E 1 2 - 8 . Lymph nodes of the arm.
middle ﬁnger, however, drain ﬁrst
into the epitrochlear nodes. These are located on the medial surface of the arm
approximately 3 cm above the elbow. Lymphatics from the rest of the arm drain
primarily into the axillary nodes. Some lymph ﬂuid may go directly to the infraclavicular nodes.

C H A P T E R 12

| The Peripheral Vascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

515

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The lymphatics of the lower limb, following the
venous supply, consist of both deep and superﬁcial
systems (Fig. 12-9). Only the superﬁcial nodes are
palpable. The superﬁcial inguinal nodes include two
groups. The horizontal group lies in a chain high in the
anterior thigh below the inguinal ligament. It drains
the superﬁcial portions of the lower abdomen and
buttock, the external genitalia (but not the testes), the
anal canal and perianal area, and the lower vagina.
The vertical group clusters near the upper part of the
saphenous vein and drains a corresponding region of
the leg. By contrast, lymphatics from the portion of leg
drained by the small saphenous vein (the heel and
outer aspect of the foot) join the deep system at the
level of the popliteal space. Lesions in this space are not
usually associated with palpable inguinal lymph nodes.

Transcapillary Fluid
Exchange

Horizontal group
Femoral vein
Femoral artery
Great
saphenous vein
Vertical group

FIGURE 12-9.

Superﬁcial inguinal lymph nodes.
Lymph vessels

Blood circulates from arteries to veins through the
capillary bed (Fig. 12-10). Traditionally, ﬂuid shifts
between the plasma in the intravascular space and
tissue interstitial space have been described by the
Venule
Arteriole
Starling law. Starling proposed outward ﬁltration at
the arteriolar end of the capillary (due to hydrostatic
and interstitial colloid oncotic pressures) and inward
Colloid osmotic
resorption at the venous end of the capillary (due to
pressure of
colloid osmotic pressure from plasma proteins).
Hydrostatic
plasma proteins
pressure
Recent studies have demonstrated greater complexity in capillary dynamics and the relationships
between the endothelial capillary lining, the interstiInterstitial space
interstitial colloid
tium, and lymphatic drainage.16–18 Net ﬁltration
oncotic pressure
appears to continue throughout the capillary, reguCapillary bed
lated in part by a capillary endothelial glycocalyx
layer that affects intravascular volume and net ﬁltration. Interstitial oncotic pressure is notably lower
F I G U R E 1 2 - 1 0 . Capillary ﬂuid exchange.
than plasma oncotic pressure. Moreover, the interMechanisms for the development of
stitium is more than a reservoir for plasma ultraﬁltrate. It is a complex system of
edema include increased plasma volﬂuid containing albumin, a gel consisting of glycosaminoglycan molecules, and
ume from sodium retention, altered
collagen. Capillary transendothelial ﬁltration has been found to be signiﬁcantly
capillary dynamics resulting in net filless than previously understood. Most ﬁltered ﬂuid returns to the circulation not
tration, inadequate removal of filtered
as ﬂuid resorbed at the venous end of the capillaries, but as lymph. The kidneys
lymph fluid, lymphatic or venous
also play a role in retention of sodium and water when plasma volume goes down.
obstruction, and increased capillary
Much of this ﬂuid enters the interstitial space and appears clinically as edema.
permeability.19,20 See Table 12-1, Types
Readers are encouraged to review this recent literature, which has implications for
of Peripheral Edema, p. 533.
use of crystalloid versus colloid ﬂuid resuscitation.
516

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY

The Health History
Common or Concerning Symptoms
Abdominal, ﬂank, or back pain
Pain or weakness in the arms or legs
● Intermittent claudication
● Cold, numbness, pallor in the legs; hair loss
● Swelling in calves, legs, or feet
● Color change in ﬁngertips or toes in cold weather
● Swelling with redness or tenderness
●
●

Peripheral Arterial Disease. As noted, PAD refers to stenotic, occlusive,
and aneurysmal disease of the abdominal aorta, its mesenteric and renal
branches, and the arteries of the lower extremities, exclusive of the coronary
arteries.5 Pain in the extremities can also arise from the skin, musculoskeletal
system, or nervous system. It may also be referred, like the pain of myocardial
infarction that radiates to the left arm.

See Table 12-2, Painful Peripheral
Vascular Disorders and Their Mimics,
pp. 534–535.

■ Ask about abdominal, ﬂank, or back pain, especially in older smokers. Is

An expanding hematoma from an
abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA)
may cause symptoms by compressing
the bowel, aortic branch arteries, or
the ureters.21,22

there unusual constipation or distention? Inquire about for urinary retention, difﬁculty voiding, or renal colic.

■ If there is persisting abdominal pain, ask about any related “food fear,” weight

loss, or dark stool.

■ Ask about any pain or cramping in the legs during exertion that is relieved

by rest within 10 minutes, called intermittent claudication.

C H A P T E R 12

These symptoms suggest mesenteric
ischemia from arterial embolism,
arterial or venous thrombosis, bowel
volvulus or strangulation, or hypoperfusion. Failure to detect acute symptoms can result in bowel necrosis and
even death.
Symptomatic limb ischemia with
exertion is atherosclerotic PAD. Pain
with walking or prolonged standing,
radiating from the spinal area into
the buttocks, thighs, lower legs, or
feet, is neurogenic claudication. The
positive likelihood ratio (LR) of spinal
stenosis is >6 if the pain is relieved by
sitting and bending forward, or if
there is bilateral buttock or leg
pain.23

| The Peripheral Vascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

517

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY
■ Ask also about coldness, numbness, or pallor in the legs or feet or loss of hair

over the anterior tibial surfaces.

Because most patients with PAD report minimal symptoms, enquire about two
common types of atypical leg pain from PAD that occur prior to critical limb
ischemia: leg pain on exertion and rest (exertional pain that can begin at rest), and
leg pain/carry on (exertional pain that does not stop the patient from walking).
Ask speciﬁcally about the PAD warning signs that follow, particularly in patients
aged ≥50 years and those with PAD risk factors, especially smoking, but also
diabetes, hypertension, elevated cholesterol, African American ethnicity, or coronary artery disease (see pp. 363–364). When the symptoms or risk factors
described in the box below are present, pursue careful examination and testing
with the ankle–brachial index (ABI) (see also p. 536).

Peripheral Arterial Disease “Warning Signs”
Fatigue, aching, numbness, or pain that limits walking or exertion in the legs;
if present, identify the location. Ask also about erectile dysfunction.
● Any poorly healing or nonhealing wounds of the legs or feet
● Any pain present when at rest in the lower leg or foot and changes when
standing or supine
●

Hair loss over the anterior tibiae
points to decreased arterial perfusion.
“Dry” or brown–black ulcers from
gangrene may ensue.
Only 10% of patients have the classic
features of leg pain with exertion
relieved by rest.24 Another 30% to
50% have atypical leg pain, and up to
60% are asymptomatic. Asymptomatic patients can have significant
functional impairment that limits or
slows walking to avoid symptoms as
PAD is progressing.

Symptom location suggests the site of
arterial ischemia:
● buttock, hip: aortoiliac
● erectile dysfunction: iliac–pudendal
● thigh: common femoral or aortoiliac
● upper calf: superficial femoral
● lower calf: popliteal
● foot: tibial or peroneal

●

Abdominal pain after meals and associated “food fear” and weight loss (see
Chapter 11)

These symptoms suggest intestinal
ischemia of the celiac or superior or
inferior mesenteric arteries.

●

Any ﬁrst-degree relatives with an AAA

Prevalence of AAAs in first-degree
relatives is 15% to 28%.25

Peripheral Venous Disease (or Venous Thromboembolism). In
patients with central venous catheters, ask about arm discomfort, pain,
paresthesias, and weakness.

These symptoms point to upper
extremity DVT, most commonly from
catheter-associated thrombosis.11
Most patients are asymptomatic with
thrombosis detected on routine
screening.

Ask about pain or swelling in the calf or leg.

Because individual clinical features
have poor diagnostic value, experts
recommend use of well-validated formal clinical scoring systems like the
Wells Clinical Score and the Primary
Care Rule for all patients with suspected DVT.8,26

518

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

Health Promotion and
Counseling: Evidence and
Recommendations
Important Topics for Health Promotion
and Counseling
Screening for lower-extremity peripheral artery disease
The ankle–brachial index
● Screening for renal artery disease
● Screening for abdominal aortic aneurysm
●
●

Screening for Lower-Extremity Peripheral Artery Disease.
Atherosclerotic lower-extremity PAD affects more than 200 million people
globally.27 Prevalence increases with age, ranging from around 5% at ages 40 to 49
years to 15% to 20% in persons aged 80 years and older. Cardiovascular risk
factors, particularly smoking and diabetes, increase risk for PAD: an estimated 40%
to 60% of PAD patients have coexisting coronary artery disease and/or cerebral
artery disease, and the presence of PAD signiﬁcantly increases the risk for
cardiovascular events.28 Only a minority of PAD patients have classic claudication
(exertional calf pain relieved by rest), and many are asymptomatic.29

Risk Factors for Lower-Extremity Peripheral
Arterial Disease
Age ≥65 years
Age ≥50 years with a history of diabetes or smoking
● Leg symptoms with exertion
● Nonhealing wounds
●
●

Source: Rooke TW, Hirsch AT, Misra S, et al. Management of patients with peripheral artery disease
(compilation of 2005 and 2011 ACCF/AHA Guideline Recommendations): a report of the American
College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines.
American College of Cardiology Foundation Task Force, American Heart Association Task Force.
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61:1555.

The Ankle–Brachial Index. PAD can be diagnosed noninvasively using
the ABI. The ABI is the ratio of blood pressure measurements in the foot and arm;
values <0.9 are considered abnormal. However, the U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force (USPSTF) does not advocate PAD screening due to insufﬁcient evidence
for estimating the relative beneﬁts and harms of ABI testing (I statement).30
Nonetheless, the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart
Association (ACCF/AHA) practice guidelines recommend measuring ABI in those
at risk, as detailed in the box below, in order to offer therapeutic interventions to
reduce the risk of cardiovascular events.5
C H A P T E R 12

| The Peripheral Vascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

519

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Learn to use the ABI, which is reliable, reproducible, and easy to perform in the
ofﬁce. Although the sensitivity of an abnormal ABI is low (15% to 20%), the
speciﬁcity is 99%, and the test has high positive and negative predictive values
(both >80%).1 Clinicians or ofﬁce staff can easily measure systolic blood pressure
in the arms using a sphygmomanometer and the pedal pulses using Doppler
ultrasound. These values can be entered into calculators available at selected
websites (see American College of Physicians, at http://www.sononet.us/abiscore/
abiscore.htm).

See Table 12-3, Using the Ankle–
Brachial Index, p. 536.

For patients with PAD and intermittent claudication, the ACCF/AHA guidelines strongly recommend supervised exercise programs as the initial treatment. 5 Randomized clinical trials have shown signiﬁcantly increased
pain-free walking distances with supervised exercise programs compared to
nonsupervised programs. 31 Other recommendations for managing PAD
include: tobacco cessation; treatment of hyperlipidemia; optimal control of
diabetes and hypertension; use of antiplatelet agents; meticulous foot care
and well-ﬁtting shoes, particularly for diabetic patients; and, in selected
cases, revascularization.
Screening for Renal Artery Disease. Atherosclerotic renal artery
stenosis (RAS) is present in substantial proportions of patients with end-stage
renal disease, congestive heart failure, co-occurring diabetes and hypertension,
and other atherosclerotic diseases.32 Atherosclerotic RAS is associated with
markedly increased risks for cardiovascular events.33 RAS is less commonly
caused by ﬁbromuscular dysplasia, usually in women younger than age 40 years.
The ACCF/AHA guidelines recommend screening for RAS with either duplex
ultrasonography, magnetic resonance angiography, or computed tomographic
angiography in patients with the conditions listed in the box below.5

See Chapter 9, pp. 365–367, for
guidelines for assessing blood pressure.
The frequency of hypertension arising
from RAS is unknown.

Conditions Suspicious for Renal Artery Disease
Onset of hypertension at age ≤30 years
Onset of severe hypertension at age ≥55 years
● Accelerated (sudden and persistent worsening of previously controlled hypertension), resistant (not controlled with three drugs), or malignant hypertension (evidence of acute end-organ damage)
● New worsening of renal function or worsening function after use of an
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or an angiotensin-receptor blocking agent
● An unexplained small kidney or size discrepancy of >1.5 cm between the two
kidneys
● Sudden unexplained pulmonary edema, especially in the setting of worsening
renal function
●
●

Screening for Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm. AAA is deﬁned as an
infrarenal aortic diameter ≥3 cm. The population prevalence of AAA in adults
older than age 50 years ranges from 3.9% to 7.2% in men and from 1% to 1.3%
in women.34,35 The dreaded consequence of AAA is rupture, which is often

520

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
fatal—most patients die before reaching a hospital. The chances of rupture and
mortality increase dramatically when the aortic diameter exceeds 5.5 cm. The
strongest risk factors for AAA are older age, male sex, smoking, and family history;
other potential risk factors include history of other vascular aneurysms, taller height,
coronary artery disease, cerebrovascular disease, atherosclerosis, hypertension, and
hyperlipidemia.34
Because symptoms are uncommon and screening can reduce AAA-related mortality by about 50% over 13 to 15 years, the USPSTF makes a grade B recommendation for one-time ultrasound screening of men aged 65 to 75 years who
have smoked more than 100 cigarettes in a lifetime.36 Clinicians can selectively
offer screening to men in this age range who have never smoked (grade C); evidence is insufﬁcient regarding screening women in this age range who have ever
smoked (I statement). However, the USPSTF recommends against screening
women who have never smoked (grade D). Ultrasound is a noninvasive, inexpensive, and accurate (sensitivity 94% to 100%; speciﬁcity 98% to 100%)
screening test for diagnosing AAA. Palpation is not sensitive enough to be recommended for screening.

Techniques of Examination
Important Areas of Examination
Arms

Abdomen

Legs

Size, symmetry,
skin color
Radial pulse,
brachial pulse
Epitrochlear lymph
nodes

Aortic width and
pulsation
Inguinal lymph nodes

Size, symmetry, skin color
Femoral, popliteal,
dorsalis pedis, and
posterior tibial pulses
Thighs, calves, and
ankles for swelling and
peripheral edema

As you intensify your focus on the peripheral vascular system, recall that peripheral arterial disease is often asymptomatic and underdiagnosed, leading to signiﬁcant morbidity and mortality. Review the techniques for assessing blood
pressure, the carotid artery, the aorta, and the renal and femoral arteries on the
pages indicated below, which reﬂect current guidelines.

C H A P T E R 12

| The Peripheral Vascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

521

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Summary: Key Components of the Peripheral
Arterial Examination
Measure the blood pressure in both arms (see Chapter 4, p. 130).
Palpate the carotid upstroke, auscultate for bruits (see Chapter 9, pp. 381–
382).

Asymmetric blood pressures are
found in coarctation of the aorta and
dissecting aortic aneurysm.

Auscultate for aortic, renal, and femoral bruits; palpate the aorta and assess
its maximal diameter (see Chapter 11, pp. 472, 483).
● Palpate the pulses of the brachial, radial, ulnar, femoral, popliteal, DP, and PT
arteries.
● Inspect the ankles and feet for color, temperature, and skin integrity; note any
ulcerations; inspect for hair loss, trophic skin changes, hypertrophic nails.

Atherosclerotic disease occurs preferentially in selected arteries—the
carotid bifurcation and the proximal
renal arteries (and the proximal left
anterior descending coronary
artery).14 In the aorta, atherosclerotic
disease results in ectasia and the formation of aneurysms.

●
●

●

Source: Hirsch AT, Haskal ZJ, Hertzer NR, et al. ACC/AHA 2005 Practice Guidelines for the management of patients with peripheral arterial disease (lower extremity, renal, mesenteric, and abdominal
aortic): a collaborative report from the American Association for Vascular Surgery/Society for Vascular Surgery, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society for Vascular Medicine and Biology, Society of Interventional Radiology, and the ACC/AHA Task Force on Practice
Guidelines (Writing Committee to Develop Guidelines for the Management of Patients With Peripheral Arterial Disease): endorsed by the American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary
Rehabilitation; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; Society for Vascular Nursing; TransAtlantic Inter-Society Consensus; and Vascular Disease Foundation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;47:1239.

There are several recommended systems for grading the amplitude of arterial
pulses. One system uses a scale of 0 to 3, as shown in the box below.25 Use the
scale adopted by your institution.

If an artery is widely dilated, it is
aneurysmal.

Recommended Grading of Pulses
Bounding
Brisk, expected (normal)
Diminished, weaker than expected
Absent, unable to palpate

3+
2+
1+
0

Bounding carotid, radial, and femoral
pulses are present in aortic regurgitation; asymmetric diminished pulses
point to arterial occlusion from atherosclerosis or embolism.

Arms
Inspection.

Inspect both arms from the ﬁngertips to the shoulders. Note:

■ Their size, symmetry, and any swelling

Swelling from lymphedema of the
arm and hand may follow axillary
node dissection and radiation
therapy.

■ The venous pattern

Visible venous collaterals, swelling,
edema, and discoloration signal
upper extremity DVT.11

■ The color of the skin and nail beds and the texture of the skin

522

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Palpation. Palpate the radial pulse
with the pads of your ﬁngers on the
ﬂexor surface of the lateral wrist
(Fig. 12-11). Partially flexing the
patient’s wrist may help you feel this
pulse. Compare the pulses in both arms.

FIGURE 12-11.
pulse.

Palpate the radial

FIGURE 12-12.
disease.

Raynaud

In Raynaud disease, wrist pulses are typically normal, but spasm of more distal
arteries causes episodes of sharply
demarcated pallor of the fingers, as
shown in Figure 12-12 (see Table 12-2,
Painful Peripheral Vascular Disorders
and Their Mimics, pp. 534–535).

If you suspect arterial insufﬁciency,
palpate the brachial pulse. Flex the
patient’s elbow slightly, and palpate
the artery just medial to the biceps
tendon at the antecubital crease (Fig.
12-13). The brachial pulse can also be
palpated higher in the arm in the
groove between the biceps and triceps
muscles.

Capillary refill time in the digits of
>5 seconds has low sensitivity and
specificity and is not considered
diagnostically helpful.26

FIGURE 12-13.
brachial pulse.

Palpate the

Palpate one or more epitrochlear nodes.
With the patient’s elbow ﬂexed to
about 90º and the forearm supported
by your hand, reach around behind
the arm and feel in the groove between
the biceps and triceps muscles, about
3 cm above the medial epicondyle
(Fig. 12-14). If a node is present, note
its size, consistency, and tenderness.
Epitrochlear nodes are difﬁcult to
identify in most healthy people.

An enlarged epitrochlear node suggests local or distal infection or may
be associated with lymphadenopathy
from lymphoma or human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).

Right hand of examiner
Medial epicondyle of humerus

FIGURE 12-14.
epitrochlear nodes.

Palpate the

C H A P T E R 12

| The Peripheral Vascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

523

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Abdomen
For techniques of examination of the abdominal aorta, see Chapter 11, Abdomen,
pp. 472, 483. In brief, listen for aortic, renal, and femoral bruits. Palpate and
estimate the width of the abdominal aorta in the epigastric area by measuring the
aortic width between two ﬁngers, especially in older adults and smokers due to
higher risk of AAA. Assess for a pulsatile mass.

The sensitivity of aortic palpation for
AAA ≥4 cm is 60%. Sensitivity for a
pulsatile mass, detected in only 50%
of diagnosed ruptures, is 40% to 60%.
Note that an inguinal mass suspicious
for an incarcerated hernia is often
diagnosed as an AAA at surgery.22

The Inguinal Lymph Nodes. Palpate the superﬁcial inguinal nodes, including
both the horizontal and the vertical groups (Fig. 12-15). Note their size, consistency,
and discreteness, and note any tenderness. Nontender, discrete inguinal nodes up
to 1 cm or even 2 cm in diameter are frequently palpable in normal people.

Lymphadenopathy refers to enlarged
lymph nodes, with or without tenderness. Distinguish between local and
generalized lymphadenopathy by
locating either a causative lesion in
the drainage area, or enlarged nodes
in at least two other noncontiguous
lymph node regions.

Horizontal group
Femoral vein
Femoral artery
Great
saphenous vein
Vertical group

FIGURE 12-15.

Superﬁcial inguinal lymph nodes.

Legs
The patient should be supine and draped so that the external genitalia are covered and the legs fully exposed. Stockings or socks should be removed.
Inspection.

Inspect both legs from the groin and buttocks to the feet. Note:

■ Their size, symmetry, and any swelling or edema
■ The venous pattern and any venous enlargement

524

Individual findings of calf, leg, or
ankle swelling or asymmetry; venous
dilatation; erythema; or superficial
thrombophlebitis have low diagnostic
value for DVT compared to combined
scoring systems and ultrasound.8,26
See also Table 12-4, Chronic Insufficiency of Arteries and Veins, p. 537.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Any pigmentation, rashes, scars, or ulcers

Ulcers or sores on the feet raise the LR
of peripheral vascular disease to 7.26
See Table 12-5, Common Ulcers of the
Ankles and Feet, p. 538.

■ The color and texture of the skin, the color of the nail beds, and the distribu-

Warmth and redness over the calf
signal cellulitis. Atrophic and hairless
skin is commonly present but not
diagnostic of PAD.

tion of hair on the lower legs, feet, and toes

Inspect the color of the skin.
■ Is there a local area of redness? If so, note its temperature.

Local swelling, redness, warmth, and a
subcutaneous cord signal superficial
thrombophlebitis, an emerging risk
factor for DVT.10

■ Are there brownish areas near the ankles?

Brownish discoloration or ulcers just
above the malleolus suggests chronic
venous insufficiency.

■ Note any ulcers in the skin. Where are they?

Thickened, brawny skin suggests
lymphedema and advanced venous
insufficiency.

Inspect the saphenous system for varicosities. If present, ask the patient to stand,
which allows any varicosities to ﬁll with blood and makes them visible; these
changes are easily missed when the patient is supine. Palpate along any varicosities to check for thrombophlebitis.

Varicose veins are dilated and tortuous. Their walls may feel somewhat
thickened. Note the many varicose
veins along the leg on p. 531.

Inspect and compare the thighs, calves,
and ankles for symmetry. Note their relative size and the prominence of veins,
tendons, and bones. Are the veins unusually prominent (Fig. 12-16)?

FIGURE 12-16.
prominent veins.

Note the

F I G U R E 1 2 - 1 7 . Pretibial edema.

Edema may obscure the veins, tendons,
and bony prominences.

C H A P T E R 12

| The Peripheral Vascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

525

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Is there swelling or edema (Fig. 12-17)? If so, is it unilateral or bilateral?

Unilateral calf and ankle swelling and
edema suggest venous thromboembolic disease (VTE) from DVT, chronic
venous insufficiency from prior DVT,
or incompetent venous valves; or it
may be lymphedema.
Bilateral edema is present in heart failure, cirrhosis, and nephrotic syndrome.
Venous distention suggests a venous
cause of edema.

Note the extent of the swelling. How far up the leg does it go?

In DVT, the location of edema suggests the point of occlusion—the
popliteal vein if the lower leg or ankle
is swollen, the iliofemoral veins if the
entire leg is swollen.

If you detect unilateral swelling or edema, measure the calves 10 cm below the
tibial tuberosity. Normally, the difference in calf circumference is <3 cm. Measure and compare other areas of asymmetry, if needed, including the thighs and
ankles.

Calf asymmetry >3 cm increases the LR
for DVT to >2.26 Also consider muscle
tear or trauma, Baker cyst (posterior
knee), and muscular atrophy.

Palpation: The Peripheral Pulses. Palpate the femoral, popliteal, and
pedal pulses to assess the arterial circulation.
■ The femoral pulse. Press deeply, below

If the femoral pulse is absent, the LR
of PAD is >6.26 If the occlusion is at the
aortic or iliac level, all pulses distal to
the occlusion are typically affected
and may cause postural color changes
(see pp. 530–531).

the inguinal ligament and about midway between the anterior superior
iliac spine and the symphysis pubis
(Fig. 12-18). As in deep abdominal
palpation, the use of two hands, one
on top of the other, may be helpful,
especially in obese patients.

An exaggerated, widened femoral
pulse suggests the pathological dilatation of a femoral aneurysm.

FIGURE 12-18.
femoral pulse.

526

Palpate the

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ The popliteal pulse. The patient’s knee should be somewhat ﬂexed, with the

leg relaxed. Place the ﬁngertips of both hands so that they just meet in the
midline behind the knee and press them deeply into the popliteal fossa
(Fig. 12-19). The popliteal pulse is more difﬁcult to ﬁnd than other pulses.
It is deeper and feels more diffuse.

FIGURE 12-19.

Palpate the popliteal pulse.

If you cannot palpate the popliteal pulse with this approach, try with the
patient prone (Fig. 12-20). Flex the patient’s knee to about 90º, let the lower
leg relax against your shoulder or upper arm, and press your two thumbs
deeply into the popliteal fossa (Fig. 12-21).

F I G U R E 1 2 - 2 0 . Palpate the
popliteal pulse, prone position.

An exaggerated, widened popliteal
pulse suggests a popliteal artery aneurysm. Popliteal and femoral aneurysms
are uncommon. They are usually from
atherosclerosis and occur primarily in
men age ≥50 years.

Atherosclerosis most commonly
obstructs arteries in the thigh: The
femoral pulse is normal, the popliteal
pulse decreased or absent.

F I G U R E 1 2 - 2 1 . Deep palpation
in the popliteal fossa.

C H A P T E R 12

| The Peripheral Vascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

527

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ The DP pulse. Palpate the dorsum

of the foot (not the ankle) just lateral to the extensor tendon of the
great toe (Fig. 12-22). The DP artery may be congenitally absent or
branch higher in the ankle. If you
cannot feel a pulse, explore the
dorsum of the foot more laterally.

Absent pedal pulses with normal femoral and popliteal pulses raise the LR
of PAD to >14.26

FIGURE 12-22.
dorsalis pedis pulse.

Palpate the

■ The PT pulse. Curve your ﬁngers

Acute arterial occlusion from embolism or thrombosis causes pain and
numbness or tingling. The limb distal
to the occlusion becomes cold, pale,
and pulseless. Pursue emergency
treatment.

behind and slightly below the medial malleolus of the ankle (Fig.
12-23). This pulse may be hard to
feel in a fat or edematous ankle.

F I G U R E 1 2 - 2 3 . Palpate the
posterior tibial pulse.

Tips for Palpating Difﬁcult Pulses
●

●

●

Position your body and examining hand comfortably; awkward positions
decrease tactile sensitivity.
Once your hand is positioned properly, linger and vary the pressure of your
ﬁngers to pick up a weak pulsation. If unsuccessful, explore the area gently
but more deliberately.
Do not mistake the patient’s pulse with your own pulsating ﬁngertips. If
needed, count your own heart rate and compare it to the patient’s. The rates
are usually diﬀerent. Your carotid pulse is convenient for this comparison.

Assess the temperature of the feet and legs with the backs of your ﬁngers. Compare
one side with the other. Bilateral coldness is usually caused by a cold environment or anxiety.

Asymmetric coolness of the feet has a
positive LR of >6 for PAD.26

The Peripheral Veins: Swelling and Edema. If swelling or edema is
present, palpate for pitting edema. Press ﬁrmly but gently with your thumb for at
least 2 seconds (1) over the dorsum of each foot, (2) behind each medial
malleolus, and (3) over the shins (Fig. 12-24). Look for pitting—a depression
caused by pressure from your thumb. Normally there is none. The severity of
edema is graded on a four-point scale, from slight to very marked.

See Table 12-1, Types of Peripheral
Edema, p. 533.

528

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

FIGURE 12-24.

FIGURE 12-25.
edema.

Palpate for pitting edema.

3+ pitting

Palpate for any venous tenderness or cords, which can accompany a DVT. DVTs
often have no demonstrable signs, so diagnosis often depends on clinical suspicion and testing.

Figure 12-25 shows 3+ pitting edema.

■ Palpate the inguinal area just medial to the femoral pulse for tenderness of

A painful, pale, swollen leg, together
with tenderness in the groin over the
femoral vein, suggests deep iliofemoral thrombosis. Risk of PE in proximal
vein thrombosis is 50%.7

the femoral vein.

■ Next, with the patient’s leg ﬂexed at the knee and relaxed, palpate the calf.

With your ﬁngerpads, gently compress the calf muscles against the tibia, and
search for any tenderness or cords.

Only half of patients with DVT in the
calf have tenderness or venous cords,
and absence of calf tenderness does
not rule out thrombosis. Note that
Homan sign, discomfort behind the
knee with forced dorsiflexion on the
foot, is neither sensitive nor specific,
and discredited by Homan himself.26

Special Techniques
Arterial occlusive disease is much less
common in the arms than in the legs.
Absent or diminished pulses at the
wrist occur in acute embolic occlusion
and in Buerger disease, or thromboangiitis obliterans.

Evaluating Arterial Perfusion of the
Hand. If you suspect arterial insufﬁciency in the
arm or hand, try to palpate the ulnar pulse as well as
the radial and brachial pulses. Press deeply on the
ﬂexor surface of the medial wrist (Fig. 12-26).
Partially ﬂexing the patient’s wrist may help you. The
pulse of a normal ulnar artery may not be palpable.
The Allen Test. The Allen test compares
patency of the ulnar and radial arteries. It also
ensures patency of the ulnar artery before puncturing the radial artery for blood samples. The
patient should rest with hands in lap, palms up.

FIGURE 12-26.
the ulnar pulse.

Palpate

C H A P T E R 12

| The Peripheral Vascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

529

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Ask the patient to make a tight ﬁst with one
hand; then compress both radial and ulnar arteries ﬁrmly between your thumbs and ﬁngers
(Fig. 12-27).

F I G U R E 1 2 - 2 7 . Compress
the radial and ulnar arteries.

Next, ask the patient to open the hand into a
relaxed, slightly ﬂexed position (Fig. 12-28). The
palm is pale.

Extending the hand fully may cause
pallor and a falsely positive test.

F I G U R E 1 2 - 2 8 . Pallor
when hand relaxed.

Release your pressure over the ulnar artery. If the
ulnar artery is patent, the palm ﬂushes within
about 3 to 5 seconds (Fig. 12-29).

F I G U R E 1 2 - 2 9 . Palmar
ﬂushing—Allen test negative.

Test patency of the radial artery by releasing the radial artery while still compressing the ulnar artery.
Postural Color Changes of Chronic Arterial Insufﬁciency. If
pain or diminished pulses suggest arterial insufﬁciency, consider looking for
postural color changes using the Buerger test (although it has not been
studied well).26 Raise both legs to about 90º for up to 2 minutes until there
is maximal pallor of the feet. In light-skinned persons, expect to see normal
color, as in this right foot (Fig. 12-31), or slight pallor. In darker-skinned
persons, if color changes are difﬁcult to see, inspect the soles of the feet
instead, and use tangential lighting to see the veins.

530

FIGURE 12-30.
Allen test positive.

Palmar pallor—

Persisting pallor indicates occlusion of
the ulnar artery or its distal branches,
as shown in Figure 12-30.

Marked pallor on elevation suggests
arterial insufficiency, as shown in
Figure 12-31, left foot (right side of
photo).

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

F I G U R E 1 2 - 3 1 . The
Buerger test—legs elevated.

F I G U R E 1 2 - 3 2 . The
Buerger test—legs when sitting.

Then ask the patient to sit up with legs dangling down. Compare both feet, noting the time required for:
■ Return of pinkness to the skin, normally about 10 seconds or less
■ Filling of the veins of the feet and ankles, normally about 15 seconds

This right foot has normal color, and the veins on the foot have ﬁlled
(Fig. 12-32). These normal responses suggest an adequate circulation.

As shown in Figure 12-32, right side,
the left foot is still pale, and the veins
are just starting to fill, signs of arterial
insufficiency.

Look for any unusual rubor (dusky redness) to replace the pallor of the dependent foot. Rubor may take a minute or more to appear.

Persisting dependent rubor suggests
arterial insufficiency (see p. 538). If
the patient’s veins are incompetent,
dependent rubor and the timing of
color return and venous filling are not
reliable tests of arterial insufficiency.

Normal responses accompanied by diminished arterial pulses point to good collateral circulation around an arterial occlusion.
Mapping Varicose Veins. Mapping
can demonstrate varicose veins and their
origin. With the patient standing, place
your palpating ﬁngers gently on a vein and,
with your other hand below it, compress
the vein sharply (Fig. 12-33). Feel for a
pressure wave transmitted to the ﬁngers of
your upper hand. A palpable pressure wave
indicates that the two parts of the vein are
connected.

Feel for a
pressure wave

Compress sharply

A wave may also be transmitted downward,
but not as easily.

FIGURE 12-33.
both hands.

Compress with

F I G U R E 1 2 - 3 4 . Varicose veins.

Source for Figs. 12-31 and 12-32: Kappert A, Winsor T. Diagnosis of Peripheral Vascular Disease.
Philadelphia, PA: FA Davis, 1972.

C H A P T E R 12

| The Peripheral Vascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

531

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
Evaluating the Competency of Venous Valves. Use the retrograde
ﬁlling (Trendelenburg) test to assess the valves of the communicating veins and the
saphenous system.
■ With the patient supine, elevate one leg to about 90º to empty it of venous

blood.
■ Occlude the great saphenous vein in the upper thigh by manual compres-

sion, using enough pressure to occlude this vein but not the deeper vessels.
■ Ask the patient to stand. While you keep the vein occluded, watch for venous

ﬁlling in the leg. Normally, the saphenous vein ﬁlls from below, taking about
35 seconds as blood ﬂows through the capillary bed into the venous system.
■ After the patient stands for 20 seconds, release the compression and look for

sudden additional venous ﬁlling. Normally, slow ﬁlling continues because
competent valves in the saphenous vein block retrograde ﬂow.

When both steps of this test are normal, the response is termed “negative–
negative.”

Rapid filling of the superficial veins
during occlusion of the saphenous
vein indicates incompetent valves in
the communicating veins that allow
rapid retrograde flow from the deep
to the saphenous system.
Sudden additional filling of superficial veins after release of compression
indicates incompetent valves in the
saphenous vein.
Results can be negative–positive;
positive–negative; or, when both
steps are abnormal, positive–positive.

Recording Your Findings
Note that initially you may use sentences to describe your ﬁndings; later you will
use phrases. Written descriptions of lymph nodes appear in Chapter 7, The Head
and Neck (see p. 259). Likewise, assessment of the carotid pulse is recorded in
Chapter 9, The Cardiovascular System (see pp. 380–382).
Recording the Physical Examination—The
Peripheral Vascular System
“Extremities are warm and without edema. No varicosities or stasis changes.
Calves are supple and nontender. No femoral or abdominal bruits. Brachial,
radial, femoral, popliteal, dorsalis pedis (DP), and posterior tibial (PT) pulses are
2+ and symmetric.”
OR
“Extremities are pale below the midcalf, with notable hair loss. Rubor noted
when legs dependent but no edema or ulceration. Bilateral femoral bruits; no
abdominal bruits heard. Brachial and radial pulses 2+; femoral, popliteal, DP and
PT pulses 1+.” (Alternatively, pulses can be recorded as below.)

Radial Brachial
RT
LT

532

2+
2+

2+
2+

Femoral

Popliteal

Dorsalis
Pedis

Posterior
Tibial

1+
1+

1+
1+

1+
1+

1+
1+

These findings suggest atherosclerotic
peripheral arterial disease.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 12-1 Types of Peripheral Edema

Approximately one third of total body water is extracellular ﬂuid, which, in turn, is roughly 25% plasma; the remainder is
interstitial ﬂuid. As discussed on p. 516, new evidence has changed the traditional understanding of Starling forces across the
capillary bed. Net plasma ﬁltration appears to occur throughout the length of the capillary. Interstitial oncotic pressure is notably
lower than plasma oncotic pressure, and lymphatic drainage plays a greater role in returning interstitial ﬂuid to the circulation
than previously thought. Several clinical conditions disrupt these forces, resulting in edema, which is the clinically evident
accumulation of interstitial ﬂuid. Pitting characteristics reﬂect the viscosity of the edema ﬂuid, based primarily on its protein
concentration.20,26 When protein concentration is low, as in heart failure, pitting and recovery occur within a few seconds. In
lymphedema, protein levels are higher and nonpitting is more typical. Not depicted below is capillary leak syndrome, in which
protein leaks into the interstitial space, seen in burns, angioedema, snake bites, and allergic reactions.

Pitting

Swollen foot

Ulcer

Pitting Edema
Edema is a soft, bilateral palpable swelling from increased interstitial ﬂuid volume and
retention of salt and water, demonstrated by pitting after 1 to 2 seconds of thumb
pressure on the anterior tibiae and feet. Pitting edema occurs in several conditions: when
legs are dependent from prolonged standing or sitting, which leads to increased
hydrostatic pressure in the veins and capillaries; heart failure leading to decreased cardiac
output; nephrotic syndrome, cirrhosis, or malnutrition leading to low albumin and
decreased intravascular colloid oncotic pressure; and with selected medications.

Chronic Venous Insufﬁciency
Edema is soft, with pitting on pressure, and occasionally bilateral. Look for brawny
changes and skin thickening, especially near the ankle. Ulceration, brownish
pigmentation, and edema in the feet are common. It arises from chronic obstruction and
incompetent valves in the deep venous system. (See also Table 12-2, Painful Peripheral
Vascular Disorders and Their Mimics, pp. 534–535.)

Swollen foot

No pitting

Thick skin

Lymphedema
Edema is initially soft and pitting, then becomes indurated, hard, and nonpitting. Skin is
markedly thickened; ulceration is rare. There is no pigmentation. Edema often occurs
bilaterally in the feet and toes. Lymphedema arises from interstitial accumulation of
protein-rich ﬂuid when lymph channels are inﬁltrated or obstructed by tumor, ﬁbrosis, or
inﬂammation, or disrupted by axillary node dissection and/or radiation.

Swollen foot

C H A P T E R 12

| The Peripheral Vascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

533

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 12-2 Painful
Peripheral Vascular Disorders
and Their Mimics

Problem

Process

Location of Pain

Raynaud phenomenon, primary: Episodic reversible
vasoconstriction in the ﬁngers and toes, usually
triggered by cold temperatures (capillaries are normal);
no deﬁnable cause
Raynaud phenomenon, secondary: symptoms/signs related
to autoimmune diseases—scleroderma, systemic lupus
erythematosus, mixed connective tissue disease; cryoglobulinemia; also to occupational vascular injury; drugs
Atherosclerotic disease leading to obstruction of
peripheral arteries causing exertional claudication
(muscle pain relieved by rest) and atypical leg pain;
may progress to ischemic pain at rest
Embolism or thrombosis

Distal portions of one or more ﬁngers
Pain is usually not prominent unless ﬁngertip ulcers
develop; numbness and tingling are common

Arterial Disorders
Raynaud Phenomenon:
Primary and Secondary37

Peripheral Arterial
Disease

Acute Arterial
Occlusion

Usually calf muscles, but also occurs in the buttock,
hip, thigh, or foot, depending on the level of
obstruction; rest pain may be distal in the toes or
forefoot
Distal pain, usually involving the foot and leg

Venous Disorders (Lower Extremity)
Involves inﬂammation of a superﬁcial vein (best termed
superﬁcial phlebitis), at times with venous thrombosis
(now termed superﬁcial vein thrombosis when clot
conﬁrmed by imaging)
DVT and PE are disorders of venous thromboembolic
disease (VTE); DVTs are distal, limited to the deep calf
veins, or proximal, in the popliteal, femoral, or iliac
veins

Pain and tenderness along the course of a superﬁcial
vein, most often in the saphenous system

Chronic Venous
Insufﬁciency (Deep)

More severe form of chronic venous disease, with
chronic venous engorgement from venous occlusion
or incompetent venous valves

Diffuse aching of the leg(s)

Thromboangiitis
Obliterans (Buerger
Disease)

Inﬂammatory nonatherosclerotic occlusive disease of
small- to medium-sized arteries and veins, especially in
smokers; occluding thrombus spares the blood vessel
wall
Pressure builds from trauma or bleeding into one of the
four major muscle compartments between the knee and
ankle; each compartment is enclosed by fascia that
limits expansion to accommodate increasing pressure

Often digit or toe pain progressing to ischemic
ulcerations

Acute infection, usually from Streptococcus pyogenes or
Staphylococcus aureus, spreading up the lymphatic
channels from distal portal of entry such as skin
abrasion, ulcer, or dog bite

An arm or a leg

Superﬁcial Phlebitis
and Superﬁcial Vein
Thrombosis
Deep Venous
Thrombosis (DVT)

Compartment
Syndrome

Acute Lymphangitis

Classically, painful calf swelling with erythema, but can
be painless; signs correlate poorly with site of
thrombosis

Tight, bursting pain in calf muscles, usually in the
anterior tibial compartment, sometimes with overlying
dusky red skin

Mimics (Primarily of Acute Superﬁcial Thrombophlebitis)
Acute Cellulitis

Acute bacterial infection of the skin and subcutaneous
tissues, most commonly from beta-hemolytic streptococci
(erysipelas) and S. aureus

In the arms, legs, or elsewhere

Erythema Nodosum

Painful raised, bilateral erythematous lesions from
inﬂammation of subcutaneous fat tissue, seen in
systemic conditions such as pregnancy, sarcoidosis,
tuberculosis, streptococcal infections, inﬂammatory
bowel disease, drugs (oral contraceptives)

Anterior pretibial surfaces of both lower legs; can also
appear on extensor arms, buttocks, and thighs

534

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Timing

Factors That
Aggravate

Factors That
Relieve

Relatively brief (minutes),
but recurrent

Exposure to cold, emotional
upset

Warm environment

Primary: Distinct digital color changes of pallor,
cyanosis, and hyperemia (redness); no necrosis
Secondary: More severe, with ischemia, necrosis,
and loss of digits; capillary loops are distorted

Rest usually stops the pain in 1–3
min; rest pain may be relieved by
walking (increases perfusion),
sitting with legs dependent

Local fatigue, numbness, progressing to cool dry
hairless skin, trophic nail changes, diminished
to absent pulses, pallor with elevation,
ulceration, gangrene (see p. 538)
Coldness, numbness, weakness, absent distal
pulses

An acute episode lasting
days or longer

Immobility, venous stasis and Supportive care, walking;
chronic venous disease, venous measures prompted by further
procedure, obesity
testing

Often hard to determine
due to lack of symptoms;
one third of untreated calf
DVTs extend proximally

Immobilization or recent surAntithrombotic and
gery, lower extremity trauma,
thrombolytic therapy
pregnancy or postpartum state,
hypercoagulable state (e.g., nephrotic syndrome, malignancy)
Prolonged standing, sitting
Limb elevation, walking
with legs dependent

Local induration, erythema; if palpable nodules
or cords, consider superﬁcial or deep vein
thrombosis, both associated with signiﬁcant risk
of DVT and PE
Asymmetric calf diameters more diagnostic than
palpable cord or tenderness over femoral
triangle; Homan sign unreliable; high risk of PE
(50% with proximal DVT)

May be brief if relieved by
Exercise such as walking; if rest
rest; if there is rest pain, may pain, leg elevation and bedrest
be persistent and worse at
night
Sudden onset; associated
symptoms may occur
without pain

Chronic, increasing as the
day wears on

Ranges from brief recurrent
to chronic persistent pain

Exercise

Several hours if acute
(pressure must be relieved
to avert necrosis); during
exercise if chronic

Acute: Anabolic steroids;
surgical complication; crush
injury
Chronic: Occurs with exercise

An acute episode lasting
days or longer

Associated Manifestations

Chronic edema, pigmentation, swelling, and
possibly ulceration, especially if advanced age,
pregnancy, increased weight, prior history, or
trauma (see p. 538)
Rest; smoking cessation
May progress to gangrene at tips of digits; can
move proximally, with migratory phlebitis and
tender nodules along blood vessels; usually
involves at least two limbs
Acute: Surgical incision to
Tingling, burning sensations in calf; muscles
relieve pressure
may feel tight, full; numbness, paralysis if
Chronic: Avoiding exercise; ice, unrelieved
elevation
Red streak(s) on the skin, with tenderness,
enlarged, tender lymph nodes, and fever

An acute episode lasting
days or longer

Erythema, edema, and warmth
Erysipelas: Lesion raised and demarcated from
skin; involves upper dermis, lymphatics
Cellulitis: Involves deeper dermis, adipose tissue;
may include enlarged, tender lymph nodes and fever

Pain associated with a
series of lesions over 2 to
8 wks

2–5-cm lesions, initially elevated, bright red
then fade to violet or red-brown; do not
ulcerate; often with polyarthralgia, fever, malaise

C H A P T E R 12

| The Peripheral Vascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

535

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 12-3 Using the Ankle–Brachial Index
Instructions for Measuring the Ankle–Brachial Index (ABI)
1. Patient should rest supine in a warm room for at least 10 min before testing.
2. Place blood pressure cuffs on both arms and ankles as illustrated, then apply
ultrasound gel over brachial, dorsalis pedis, and posterior tibial arteries.
3. Measure systolic pressures in the arms
■ Use vascular Doppler to locate brachial pulse
■ Inﬂate cuff 20 mm Hg above last audible pulse
■ Deﬂate cuff slowly and record pressure at which pulse becomes audible
■ Obtain 2 measures in each arm and record the average as the brachial
pressure in that arm

Doppler

Brachial artery
Dorsalis pedis
(DP) artery

4. Measure systolic pressures in ankles
■ Use vascular Doppler to locate dorsalis pedis pulse
■ Inﬂate cuff 20 mm Hg above last audible pulse
■ Deﬂate cuff slowly and record pressure at which pulse becomes audible
■ Obtain 2 measures in each ankle and record the average as the dorsalis pedis
pressure in that leg
■ Repeat above steps for posterior tibial arteries

Doppler

Doppler

Posterior
tibial (PT)
artery

5. Calculate ABI
Right ABI =

highest right average ankle pressure (DP or PT)
highest average arm pressure (right or left)

Left ABI =

highest left average ankle pressure (DP or PT)
highest average arm pressure (right or left)

Site

1st reading 2nd reading Average

Site

Left brachial

Right brachial

Left dorsalis pedis

Right dorsalis pedis

Left posterior tibial

Right posterior tibial

Ankle–Brachial Index Calculator
A – BI = SA ÷ SB
Enter values for systolic pressure at:
The ankle:

mm/Hg

The brachial artery:

mm/Hg

1st reading

2nd reading Average

Interpretation of Ankle–Brachial Index
>0.90 (with a range of 0.90 to 1.30) = Normal lower
extremity blood ﬂow
<0.89 to >0.60 = Mid PAD
<0.59 to >0.40 = Moderate PAD
<0.39 = Severe PAD

Ankle–brachial index:
Sources: Ankle–Brachial Calculator—American College of Physicians. Available at: http://www.sononet.us/abiscore/abiscore.htm. Accessed February 28, 2015;
Wilson JF, Laine C, Goldman D. In the clinic: peripheral arterial disease. Ann Int Med. 2007;146:ITC 3.

536

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 12-4 Chronic Insufﬁciency of Arteries and Veins
Chronic Arterial Insufﬁciency (Advanced)

Chronic Venous Insufﬁciency (Advanced)

Rubor

Ischemic ulcer

Pain

Intermittent claudication, progressing to pain
at rest

Often painful

Mechanism

Tissue ischemia

Venous stasis and hypertension

Pulses

Decreased or absent

Normal, though may be difﬁcult to feel through edema

Color

Pale, especially on elevation; dusky red on
dependency

Normal, or cyanotic on dependency Petechiae and then
brown pigmentation appear with chronicity

Temperature

Cool

Normal

Edema

Absent or mild; may develop as the patient
tries to relieve rest pain by lowering the leg

Present, often marked

Skin Changes

Trophic changes: thin, shiny, atrophic skin;
loss of hair over the foot and toes; nails
thickened and ridged

Often brown pigmentation around the ankle, stasis
dermatitis, and possible thickening of the skin and
narrowing of the leg as scarring develops

Ulceration

If present, involves toes or points of trauma
on feet

If present, develops at sides of ankle, especially medially

Gangrene

May develop

Does not develop

Sources of photos: Arterial Insufﬁciency—Kappert A, Winsor T. Diagnosis of Peripheral Vascular Disease. Philadelphia, PA: FA Davis, 1972; Venous Insufﬁciency—
Marks R: Skin Disease in Old Age. London, UK: Martin Dunitz, 1987.

C H A P T E R 12

| The Peripheral Vascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

537

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 12-5 Common Ulcers of the Ankles and Feet
Chronic Venous Insufﬁciency
This condition usually appears over the medial and sometimes the lateral
malleolus. The ulcer contains small, painful granulation tissue and ﬁbrin; necrosis
or exposed tendons are rare. Borders are irregular, ﬂat, or slightly steep. Pain
affects quality of life in 75% of patients. Associated ﬁndings include edema,
reddish pigmentation and purpura, venous varicosities, the eczematous changes
of stasis dermatitis (redness, scaling, and pruritus), and at times cyanosis of the
foot when dependent. Gangrene is rare.

Arterial Insufﬁciency
This condition occurs in the toes, feet, or possibly areas of trauma (e.g., the
shins). Surrounding skin shows no callus or excess pigment, although it may be
atrophic. Pain often is severe unless masked by neuropathy. May be accompanied
by gangrene, along with decreased pulses, trophic changes, foot pallor on
elevation, and dusky rubor on dependency.

Neuropathic Ulcer
This condition develops in pressure points of areas with diminished sensation;
seen in diabetic neuropathy, neurologic disorders, and Hansen disease. The
surrounding skin is calloused. There is no pain, so the ulcer may go unnoticed. In
uncomplicated cases, there is no gangrene. Associated signs include decreased
sensation and absent ankle jerks.

Source of photos: Marks R. Skin Disease in Old Age. London, UK: Martin Dunitz, 1987.

538

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
REFERENCES

References
1. Lin JS, Olson CM, Johnson ES, et al. The ankle-brachial index for
peripheral artery disease screening and cardiovascular disease prediction among asymptomatic adults: a systematic evidence review
for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2013;
159:333.
2. Olin JW, Allie DE, Belkin M, et al. ACCF/AHA/ACR/SCAI/SIR/
SVM/SVN/SVS 2010 performance measures for adults with peripheral artery disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology
Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on performance measures, the American College of Radiology, the Society
for Cardiac Angiography and Interventions, the Society for Interventional Radiology, the Society for Vascular Medicine, the Society
for Vascular Nursing, and the Society for Vascular Surgery (Writing
Committee to Develop Clinical Performance Measures for Peripheral Artery Disease). Circulation. 2010;122:2583.
3. Allison MA, Ho E, Denenberg JO, et al. Ethnic-speciﬁc prevalence
of peripheral arterial disease in the United States. Am J Prev Med.
2007;32:328.
4. Ostchega Y, Paulose-Ram R, Dillon CF, et al. Prevalence of peripheral arterial disease and risk factors in persons aged 60 or older:
data from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey
1999–2004. J am Geriatir Soc. 2007;55:583.
5. Rooke TW, Hirsch AT, Misra S, et al. Management of patients with
peripheral artery disease (compilation of 2005 and 2011 ACCF/
AHA Guideline Recommendations): a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task
Force on Practice Guidelines. American College of Cardiology
Foundation Task Force, American Heart Association Task Force.
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61:1555.
6. Heit JA. The epidemiology of venous thromboembolism in the
community. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2008;28:370.
7. Bates SM, Ginsberg JS. Treatment of deep-vein thrombosis. N Engl
J Med. 2004;351:268.
8. Spandorfer J, Galanis T. In the clinic. Deep vein thrombosis. Ann
Intern Med. 2015;162:ITC-1.
9. Goodacre S, Sutton AJ, Sampson FC. Meta-analysis: The value of
clinical assessment in the diagnosis of deep venous thrombosis.
Ann Intern Med. 2005;143:129.
10. Decousus H, Frappé P, Accassat S, et al. Epidemiology, diagnosis,
treatment and management of superﬁcial-vein thrombosis of the
legs. Best Pract Res Clin Haematol. 2012;25:275.
11. Kucher N. Clinical practice. Deep-vein thrombosis of the upper
extremities. N Engl J Med .2011;364:861.
12. Mitchell RN. Ch. 11. Blood vessels. In: Kumar VK, Abbas AK, Aster
JC, (eds). In Robbins and Cotran Pathologic Basis of Disease. 9th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders/Elsevier; 2015.
13. Libby P. Mechanisms of disease: Mechanisms of acute coronary
syndromes and their implications for therapy. N Engl J Med.
2013;368:2004.
14. Libby P. Ch. 291e. The pathogenesis, prevention, and treatment of
atherosclerosis. In: Kasper DL, Fauci AS, Hauser SL, et al (eds).
Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. 19th ed. New York:
McGraw-Hill Education; 2015.
15. Ketelhuth DF, Hansson GK. Modulation of autoimmunity and
atherosclerosis-common targets and promising translational
approaches against disease. Circ J. 2015;79:924.

16. Levick JR, Michel CC. Microvascular ﬂuid exchange and the
revised Starling principle. Cardiovasc Res. 2010;87(2):198.
17. Woodcock TE, Woodcock TM. Revised Starling equation and the
glycocalyx model of transvascular ﬂuid exchange: an improved
paradigm for prescribing intravenous ﬂuid therapy. Br J Anaesth.
2012;108(3):384.
18. Reed RK, Rubin K. Transcapillary exchange: role and importance
of the interstitial ﬂuid pressure and the extracellular matrix. Cardiovasc Res. 2010;87(2):211.
19. Braunwald E, Loscalzo J. Ch. 50 Edema. In: Kasper DL, Fauci AS,
Hauser SL, et al (eds). Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. 19th
ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Education; 2015.
20. Lawenda BD, Mondry TE, Johnstone PA. Lymphedema: a primer
on the identiﬁcation and management of a chronic condition in
oncologic treatment. CA Cancer J Clin. 2009;59:8.
21. Kent KC. Clinical practice. Abdominal aortic aneurysms. N Engl J
Med. 2014;371:2101.
22. Lederle FA. In the clinic. Abdominal aortic aneurysm. Ann Intern
Med. 2009;150:ITC5–1.
23. Suri P, Rainville J, Kalichman L, et al. Does this older adult with
lower extremity pain have the clinical syndrome of lumbar spinal
stenosis? JAMA. 2010;304:2628.
24. McDermott MM. Lower extremity manifestations of peripheral
artery disease: the pathophysiologic and functional implications of
leg ischemia. Circ Res. 2015;116:1540.
25. Hirsch AT, Haskal ZJ, Hertzer NR, et al. ACC/AHA 2005 Practice
Guidelines for the management of patients with peripheral arterial
disease (lower extremity, renal, mesenteric, and abdominal aortic): a
collaborative report from the American Association for Vascular Surgery/Society for Vascular Surgery, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society for Vascular Medicine and Biology,
Society of Interventional Radiology, and the ACC/AHA Task Force
on Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to Develop Guidelines
for the Management of Patients With Peripheral Arterial Disease):
endorsed by the American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation; National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute;
Society for Vascular Nursing; TransAtlantic Inter-Society Consensus;
and Vascular Disease Foundation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;47:1239.
26. McGee S. Ch. 52 Peripheral Vascular Disease; Ch. 54, Edema and
Deep Vein Thrombosis. Evidence-based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2012, pp. 459–465; pp. 470–476.
27. Fowkes FG, Rudan D, Rudan I, et al. Comparison of global estimates
of prevalence and risk factors for peripheral artery disease in 2000
and 2010: a systematic review and analysis. Lancet. 2013;382:1329.
28. Norgren L, Hiatt WR, Dormandy JA, et al. Inter-Society Consensus
for the Management of Peripheral Arterial Disease (TASC II). J Vasc
Surg. 2007;45(Suppl S):S5.
29. McDermott MM. Ankle-brachial index screening to improve health
outcomes: where is the evidence? Ann Intern Med. 2013;159:362.
30. Moyer VA. Screening for peripheral artery disease and cardiovascular disease risk assessment with the ankle-brachial index in
adults: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2013;159:342.
31. Fokkenrood HJ, Bendermacher BL, Lauret GJ, et al. Supervised
exercise therapy versus non-supervised exercise therapy for intermittent claudication. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;8:CD005263.
32. de Mast Q, Beutler JJ. The prevalence of atherosclerotic renal artery
stenosis in risk groups: a systematic literature review. J Hypertens.
2009;27:1333.

C H A P T E R 12

| The Peripheral Vascular System

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

539

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
REFERENCES
33. Dworkin LD, Cooper CJ. Clinical practice. Renal-artery stenosis.
N Engl J Med. 2009;361:1972.
34. Guirguis-Blake JM, Beil TL, Sun X, et al. Primary care screening for
abdominal aortic aneurysm: A systematic evidence review for the
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Rockville, MD; 2014.
35. LeFevre ML. Screening for abdominal aortic aneurysm: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern
Med. 2014;161:281.

540

36. Guirguis-Blake JM, Beil TL, Senger CA, et al. Ultrasonography
screening for abdominal aortic aneurysms: a systematic evidence
review for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern Med.
2014;160:321.
37. Varga J. Ch. 382. Systemic sclerosis (scleroderma) and related disorders. In: Kasper DL, Fauci AS, Hauser SL, et al (eds). Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine. 19th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill
Education; 2015.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

C H A P T E R

13

Male Genitalia and Hernias
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (Vol. 14: Male Genitalia, Rectum, Anus, and Prostate)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com

Anatomy and Physiology
Review the anatomy of the male genitalia (Fig. 13-1). The shaft of the penis is
formed by three columns of vascular erectile tissue: the corpus spongiosum, containing the urethra, and two corpora cavernosa. The corpus spongiosum extends
from the bulb of the penis to the cone-shaped glans with its expanded base, or

Vas deferens

Blood vessels
Corpus
cavernosum
Corpus
spongiosum
Urethra

Seminal vesicle
Ejaculatory duct

Corona

Bulb of the penis

Glans
Prepuce
Urethral meatus
Tunica vaginalis

Epididymis
Scrotum

Spermatic cord

Testis

FIGURE 13-1.

Anatomy of male genitalia.

C H A P T E R 13

| Male Genitalia and Hernias

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

541

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

corona. In uncircumcised men, the glans is covered by a loose, hoodlike fold of
skin called the prepuce or foreskin where smegma, or secretions of the glans, may
collect. The urethra is located in the ventral midline of the shaft of the penis;
urethral abnormalities may sometimes be felt there. The urethra opens into the
vertical slit-like urethral meatus, located somewhat ventrally at the tip of the glans.
The testes are paired ovoid glands consisting primarily of seminiferous tubules
and interstitial tissue, covered by a ﬁbrous outer coating, the tunica albuginea.
The testes are normally 1.5 to 2 cm in length for prepubertal boys and 4 to 5 cm
post puberty. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GRH) from the hypothalamus
stimulates pituitary secretion of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH). LH acts on the interstitial Leydig cells to promote synthesis of
testosterone, which is converted in target tissues to 5α-dihydrotestosterone. It is
5α-dihydrotestosterone that triggers pubertal growth of the male genitalia, prostate, seminal vesicles, and secondary sex characteristics such as facial and body
hair, musculoskeletal growth, and enlargement of the larynx with its associated
low-pitched voice. FSH regulates sperm production by the germ cells and Sertoli
cells of the seminiferous tubules.
Surrounding or appended to the testes are several structures. The scrotum is a
loose, wrinkled pouch of skin and underlying dartos muscle. The scrotum is
divided into two compartments, each containing a testis or testicle. Covering the
testis, except posteriorly, is the serous membrane of the tunica vaginalis, derived
from the peritoneum of the abdomen and brought down into the scrotum during
testicular descent through the deep internal inguinal ring. The parietal layer of
the tunica vaginalis cloaks the anterior two thirds of the testis, and the visceral
layer lines the adjacent scrotum. On the posterolateral surface of each testis is the
softer, comma-shaped epididymis, consisting of tightly coiled tubules emanating
from the testis that become the vas deferens. The epididymis is normally separated from the testis by a palpable sulcus, and provides a reservoir for storage,
maturation, and transport of sperm.

If the peritoneal lining remains an
open channel to the scrotum it can
give rise to an indirect inguinal hernia.
The parietal and visceral layers form a
potential space for the abnormal fluid
accumulation of a hydrocele.

During ejaculation, the vas deferens, a ﬁrm muscular cord-like structure,
transports sperm from the tail of the epididymis along a somewhat circular
route to the urethra. The vas ascends from the scrotal sac into the pelvic cavity
through the inguinal canal, then loops anteriorly over the ureter to the prostate
behind the bladder. There, it merges with the seminal vesicle to form the ejaculatory duct, which traverses the prostate and empties into the urethra. Secretions
from the vasa deferentia, the seminal vesicles, and the prostate all contribute to
the seminal ﬂuid. Within the scrotum, each vas is closely associated with blood
vessels, nerves, and muscle ﬁbers. These structures make up the spermatic cord.
Male sexual function depends on normal levels of testosterone, arterial blood
ﬂow from the internal iliac artery to the internal pudendal artery and its penile
artery and branches, and intact neural innervation from α-adrenergic and cholinergic pathways. Erection from venous engorgement of the corpora cavernosa
results from two types of stimuli. Visual, auditory, or erotic cues trigger sympathetic outﬂow from higher brain centers to the T11 through L2 levels of the
spinal cord. Tactile stimulation initiates sensory impulses from the genitalia to
the S2 to S4 reﬂex arcs and the parasympathetic pathways through the pudendal
542

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
nerve. Both sets of stimuli appear to increase levels of nitric oxide and cyclic
guanosine monophosphate, resulting in local vasodilation.

Lymphatics
Lymph drainage from the penis passes primarily to the deep inguinal and external
inguinal nodes. Lymph vessels from the scrotum drain into the superﬁcial inguinal lymph nodes. When you ﬁnd an inﬂammatory or possibly malignant lesion
on these surfaces, assess the inguinal nodes especially carefully for enlargement or tenderness. Lymphatic drainage from the testes parallels their venous
drainage: the left testicular vein empties into the left renal vein, and the right
testicular vein empties into the inferior vena cava. The connecting lumbar and
preaortic lymph nodes in the abdomen are clinically undetectable.

See pp. 515–516 for further discussion
of the inguinal nodes.

Anatomy of the Groin
Because hernias are relatively common, it is important to understand the anatomy of the groin (Fig. 13-2). The basic landmarks are the anterior superior iliac
spine, the pubic tubercle, and the inguinal ligament that runs between them,
which are readily identiﬁed.

Anterior superior
iliac spine

Internal inguinal
ring

Inguinal
ligament

Inguinal canal

Site of femoral
canal

External inguinal
ring

X

Femoral artery
Femoral vein

Indirect inguinal hernias develop at
the internal inguinal ring, where the
spermatic cord exits the abdomen.
Direct inguinal hernias arise more
medially due to weakness in the floor
of the inguinal canal and are associated with straining and heavy lifting.

Pubic tubercle
Spermatic cord

FIGURE 13-2.

Anatomy of the groin.

The inguinal canal, which lies medial to and roughly parallel to the inguinal
ligament, forms a tunnel for the vas deferens as it passes through the abdominal
muscles. The internal opening of the canal, the internal inguinal ring, is approximately 1 cm above the midpoint of the inguinal ligament. Neither the canal nor
the internal ring is palpable through the abdominal wall. The exterior opening
of the tunnel, the external inguinal ring, is a triangular slit-like structure palpable
just above and lateral to the pubic tubercle. When loops of bowel force their way
through the inguinal canal, they produce inguinal hernias, as illustrated on p. 561.
C H A P T E R 13

| Male Genitalia and Hernias

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

543

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
THE HEALTH HISTORY

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Another route for a herniating mass is the femoral canal, below the inguinal ligament. Although this canal is not visible, you can estimate its location by placing
your right index ﬁnger, from below, on the right femoral artery. Your middle
ﬁnger will then overlie the femoral vein; your ring ﬁnger, the femoral canal.
Femoral hernias protrude at this location.

Femoral hernias are more likely to
present as emergencies with bowel
incarceration or strangulation.

The Health History
Common or Concerning Symptoms
Sexual health
Penile discharge or lesions
● Scrotal pain, swelling, or lesions
● Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
●
●

Sexual Health. Clinicians and educators recognize the importance of a
robust education in sexual health, yet training and clinical expertise remain
limited.1–5 Learn to obtain the sexual history in a respectful and nonjudgmental
manner. Your skill and comfort will grow with repetition and practice. To put
your patients at ease as you explore the sexual history, adopt the tips in the box
below.

See also Chapter 3, The Sexual History,
pp. 94–95.

Tips for Taking the Sexual History
Explain why you are taking the sexual history.
Convey that you understand that this information is highly personal, and
encourage the patient to be open and direct.
● Relate that you gather this history from all your patients.
● Aﬃrm that your conversation is conﬁdential.
●
●

For example, you can begin with a general statement such as:
“To provide good care, I need to review your sexual health and see if you are at risk for
any sexually transmitted infections. I know this is a sensitive area. Any information you
share is conﬁdential and only between us.”
Do not overlook patient groups that are often underevaluated, such as those with
disabilities, mental illness, traumatic brain injury, and the elderly, and modify
your approach as indicated.6–9 Avoid assumptions about your patients’ sexual
health or concerns unless they are based on inquiry ﬁrst.

544

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
THE HEALTH HISTORY
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity. Discussing sexual orientation and gender identity touches a vital and multifaceted core of your patients’
lives. Reﬂect on any biases you may have so that they do not interfere with
professional responses to your patients’ disclosures and concerns. A neutral
supportive approach is essential for exploring your patients’ health and wellbeing.10

Pose neutral questions about sexual orientation and gender identity such as:
■ “Are you currently dating, sexually active, or in a relationship?” “How would

you identify your sexual orientation?” The range of responses includes
heterosexual or straight, lesbian, gay, women who have sex with women,
men who have sex with men, bisexual, transsexual, and questioning, among
others.
■ Continue with “How would you describe your gender identity?” Responses

include male, female, transsexual, transgendered, intersex, female-to-male,
male-to-female, unsure or questioning, or even “prefer not to answer.”
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Health Care. Several recent
surveys provide some of the ﬁrst national data sets on the lesbian, gay, bisexual,
and transgender (LGBT) population. For the ﬁrst time, in 2013, the National
Health Interview Survey included a measure of sexual orientation: in a sample
of more than 34,000 adults, 1.6% identiﬁed as gay or lesbian, 0.7% identiﬁed
as bisexual, and 1.1% responded either other or did not know. Most gay and
lesbian respondents were between the ages of 18 and 64 years, with a higher
percentage of bisexual respondents between 18 and 44 years.11 In 2012, the
Gallup Daily Tracking Survey initiated the largest single study of the distribution of the LGBT population in the United States.12,13 The Survey added an
LGBT identity question that generated 120,000 responses: 3.4% answered “yes”
when asked if they identify as LGBT. Of those identifying as LGBT, 53% were
women and 6.4% were ages 18 to 29 years. Nearly 13% were in a domestic
partnership or living with a partner. Non-whites were more likely to identify as
LGBT: African American 4.6%; Asians 4.3%; Hispanics 4.9%; and non-Hispanic
white 3.2%. The 2013 American Community Survey of the U.S. Census Bureau
reported more than 726,000 households with same-sex couples; 34% had
same-sex spouses.14 In its 2011 report on LGBT health disparities, the Institute
of Medicine called for better measures of health care disparities among the
diverse LGBT subpopulations to elucidate their differing health behaviors and
health care needs.15

LGBT patients have higher rates of depression, suicide, anxiety, drug use, sexual
victimization, and risk of infection with HIV and STIs.16–19 The Institute of Medicine has stated that barriers to accessing quality health care for LGBT adults are “a
lack of providers who are knowledgeable about LGBT health needs as well as a fear
of discrimination in health care settings.”15 The American College of Physicians has
called for “enhancing physician understanding of how to provide culturally and
clinically competent care for LGBT individuals, addressing environmental and
social factors that can affect their mental and physical well-being,” in addition to
supporting further research into understanding their health needs.20
C H A P T E R 13

| Male Genitalia and Hernias

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

545

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY
During clinical encounters, LGBT and sexual minority patients often experience
signiﬁcant anxiety related to fears of being accepted; they may be uncomfortable
disclosing their sexual behaviors and still ﬂuctuating in their sexual identity.
When they experience bias or discrimination, they are unlikely to reveal their
sexual identity or concerns.21–23 Furthermore, reports indicate that clinicians are
often unprepared to respond to questions about fertility and transgender issues
like hormonal therapy and surgery. Expand your knowledge and clinical skills
about gay, lesbian, and transgender health as you talk with your patients and
pursue the many resources available.24–26
Sexual Response. Explore the patient’s sexual response. “How is your
current relationship?” “Are you satisﬁed with your relationship and your sexual activity?” “What about your ability to perform sexually?” If the patient
expresses relational or sexual concerns, explore both their psychological and
physiologic dimensions. Ask about the meaning of the relationship in the
patient’s life. Are there any changes in desire or frequency of sexual activity?
What is the patient’s view of the cause, what responses has the patient tried,
and what are the patient’s hopes?

Direct questions help you assess each phase of the sexual response. To assess
libido, or desire, ask “How is your desire for sex?” For the arousal phase, ask
“Can you achieve and maintain an erection?” Explore the timing, severity,
setting, and any other factors that may contribute to the patient’s concerns.
What about related changes in the relationship with his partner or in his life
circumstances? Are there circumstances when erection is normal? On awakening in the early morning or during the night? With other partners? With
masturbation?

Low libido may arise from depression,
endocrine dysfunction, or side effects
of medications.

To learn about the phase of orgasm and ejaculation of semen, if ejaculation is
premature, or early and out of control, ask “About how long does intercourse
last?” “Do you climax too soon?” “Do you feel you have control over climaxing?”
“Do you think your partner would like intercourse to last longer?” For reduced
or absent ejaculation, “Do you ﬁnd you cannot reach orgasm even though you
can have an erection?” Try to determine whether the problem involves the pleasurable sensation of orgasm, the ejaculation of seminal ﬂuid, or both. Review the
frequency and setting of the symptoms, medications, surgery, and neurologic
causes.

Premature ejaculation is common,
especially in young men. Less common is reduced or absent ejaculation
affecting middle-aged or older men.
Possible causes are medications,
surgery, neurologic deficits, or lack
of androgen. Lack of orgasm with
ejaculation is usually psychogenic.

Penile Discharge or Lesions, Scrotal Swelling or Pain, and
STIs. Ask about any discharge from the penis, dripping, or staining of
underwear. If penile discharge is present, clarify the amount, color, and any
fever, chills, rash, or associated symptoms. Note that for men born between 1940
and 1989, the median age of sexual initiation is 16.1 years and the median
number of lifetime partners is 8.8, underscoring the importance of screening for
STIs.28

Look for yellow penile discharge in
gonorrhea; white discharge in nongonococcal urethritis from Chlamydia.
See Table 13-1, Sexually Transmitted
Infections of the Male Genitalia (p. 557).

546

Erectile dysfunction may be from psychogenic causes, especially if early
morning erection is preserved; it may
also reflect decreased testosterone,
decreased blood flow in the hypogastric arterial system, impaired neural
innervation, and diabetes.27

Rash, tenosynovitis, monoarticular
arthritis, even meningitis, not always
with urogenital symptoms, occur in
disseminated gonorrhea.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Inquire about sores or growths on the penis. Ask about swelling or pain in the
scrotum.

Look for an ulcer in syphilitic chancre
and herpes; warts from human
papillomavirus (HPV); swelling in
mumps orchitis, scrotal edema, and
testicular cancer; pain in testicular
torsion, epididymitis, and orchitis.
See Table 13-2, Abnormalities of the Penis
and Scrotum, p. 558, and Table 13-3,
Abnormalities of the Testis, p. 559.

Review any previous genital symptoms or past history of infection from herpes,
gonorrhea, or syphilis. Men with multiple or same sex partners, illicit drug use,
or prior history of STIs are at increased risk of HIV infection and other new
STIs.
Because STIs may involve other areas of the body, explain that “Sexually transmitted infections can involve any body opening where you have sex. It’s important for you to tell me if you have oral or anal sex.” Ask about symptoms such as
sore throat, diarrhea, rectal bleeding, and anal itching or pain.

Infections from oral–penile transmission include gonorrhea, chlamydia,
syphilis, and herpes. Symptomatic or
asymptomatic proctitis may follow
anal intercourse.

Because many infected individuals do not have symptoms or risk factors, ask all
patients, “Do you have any concerns about HIV infection?” and discuss the need
for universal testing for HIV.29–33

Health Promotion and
Counseling: Evidence and
Recommendations
Important Topics for Health Promotion
and Counseling
Screening for STIs and HPV
Screening for HIV infection and AIDS
● Counseling about sexual practices
● Screening for testicular cancer and testicular self-examination
●
●

Prevention of Sexually Transmitted Infections and Human
Papillomavirus. The Institute of Medicine has called STIs a “hidden
epidemic of enormous health and economic consequence in the United States.”34
Clinicians play a vital role in educating patients about prevention, as well as in
detecting and treating STIs. The growing burden of STIs affects the health of
all segments of the population, but especially adolescents and young adults.
C H A P T E R 13

| Male Genitalia and Hernias

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

547

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

Facts about STIs
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recently estimated
that nearly 20 million new STIs occur each year, with almost half in between
the ages of 15 and 24 years; the associated health care costs are nearly
$16 billion.35,36
● Of the nearly 1.8 million new STI cases reported in 2013, nearly 80% were
infections from chlamydia, 18% from gonorrhea, and 3% from syphilis (all
stages). In recent years, rates of gonorrhea and syphilis infections have been
increasing, and chlamydia infections have been declining.
● The CDC notes that these ﬁgures underestimate the “true national burden” of
STIs; many cases of gonorrhea, chlamydia, and syphilis are unreported, and
mandatory reporting is not required for infections such as HPV, trichomoniasis,
and genital herpes.
●

The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) has given a grade B recommendation for chlamydia and gonorrhea screening in sexually active women age
24 years and younger; the evidence is insufﬁcient to make a recommendation for
sexually active men.37 However, substantial proportions of those with high-risk
sexual behaviors are not being tested for STIs (or HIV).
HPV Vaccination. The Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices
(ACIP) recommends routine quadrivalent HPV vaccination in males age 11 or
12 years and through age 21 years if not vaccinated previously (age 26 years if immunocompromised or having sex with other men).38 The vaccine can prevent HPVrelated diseases in males (genital warts, anal cancer, and penile cancer) and
possibly reduce HPV transmission to female sex partners and lower the risk of
oropharyngeal cancers. (See also Chapter 14, pp. 577–578.)
Screening for HIV Infection and AIDS. Despite advances in detection and
treatment, HIV and AIDS remain signiﬁcant threats to health, particularly for
younger Americans, men who have sex with men, and injection drug users.

Facts about HIV and AIDS
The CDC estimates that more than 1.2 million Americans ≥age 13 years are
currently infected with HIV, with approximately 50,000 new infections
annually.35,39,40
● More than 600,000 Americans have died with an AIDS diagnosis. At highest
risk are men who have sex with men (78% of new infections among males),
African Americans (44% of new infections), and Hispanics/Latinos (21% of
new infections); injection drug users represent 8% of new HIV infections.
● In 2011, an estimated 14% of infected individuals were unaware of their
infected status and only 37% were prescribed antiretroviral therapy (ART).41
●

548

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Identifying early HIV infection and initiating combined ART decreases the risk
of progressing to AIDS. Treatment also reduces the risk of transmitting HIV to
uninfected heterosexual partners and from a pregnant mother to her child.42
Current screening recommendations are summarized below.

Summary: Screening Recommendations for HIV
The USPSTF gives a grade A recommendation for HIV screening of adolescents and adults from age 15 to 65 years and for screening all pregnant
women.42
● The CDC recommends universal HIV testing for adolescents and adults ages
13 to 64 years in health care settings and prenatal testing of all pregnant
women.43
● The CDC recommends an opt-out approach to HIV testing—verbally notifying
the patient that testing will be performed unless the patient declines.
Separate written consent is not required.
● The American College of Physicians recommends extending the upper age for
screening to 75 years.44 The proportion of adults who have ever been tested
for HIV increased from 37% in 2000 to 45% in 2010.45
● One-time testing for low-risk patients is reasonable, but at least annual testing is recommended for high-risk groups (including adolescents younger than
15 years and older adults), deﬁned as men with male sex partners, individuals
with multiple sexual partners, past or present injection drug users, persons
who exchange sex for money or drugs, and sex partners of persons who are
HIV-infected, bisexual, or injection-drug users.43 The presence of any STI, or
requests for STI testing, warrants testing for coinfection with HIV.
●

Counseling about Sexual Practices. Clinicians must master the skills
of eliciting the sexual history and asking frank but tactful questions about sexual practices. Key information includes the patient’s sexual orientation, the
number of partners in the past month, and any history of past STIs (see also
pp. 94–95). Carefully screen for alcohol and drug use, especially injection
drugs. Patient counseling should be interactive and combine information
about general risk reduction with personalized messages based on the patient’s
personal risk behaviors. Implementing this approach, termed client-centered
counseling, can reduce the frequency of high-risk behaviors and lower the acquisition rates for STIs.46

See discussions of the sexual history
on pp. 94–95 and pp. 544–547.

As you counsel patients, encourage them to seek prompt attention for any genital
lesions or penile discharge. Address preventive behaviors such as using condoms,
limiting the number of sexual partners, and establishing regular health care for treatment of STIs and HIV. Correct use of male condoms is highly effective in preventing
the transmission of HIV, HPV, and other STIs.47 Key instructions should include:
■ Using a new condom with each sex act
■ Applying the condom before any sexual contact occurs

C H A P T E R 13

| Male Genitalia and Hernias

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

549

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

■ Adding only water-based lubricants
■ Immediately withdraw if the condom breaks during sexual activity, and

holding the condom during withdrawal to keep it from slipping off.
Screening for Testicular Cancer and Testicular
Self-Examination
Epidemiology. In 2015, an estimated 8,430 cases of testicular cancer
will be diagnosed in the United States though fewer than 400 males are
expected to die from this cancer.48 While testicular cancer is rare, it is highly
treatable when detected early. It is the most commonly diagnosed cancer in
white men from ages 20 to 34 years; the risk of diagnosis is ﬁve times more
common in white men compared to black men.49 Risk factors are family history, HIV infection, and a history of cryptorchidism (undescended testicle).
Cryptorchidism, present in 7% to 10% of men with testicular cancer, confers a 3- to 17-fold increased risk for testicular cancer.50 About 70% of
testicular cancers are localized; most are curable even when diagnosed at
advanced stage.
Screening Recommendations. In 2011, the USPSTF concluded that
there is inadequate evidence for the beneﬁt of screening, either by clinical
examination or self-examination, and advised against screening for testicular
cancer in asymptomatic adolescent or adult males (grade D recommendation).51 In contrast, the American Cancer Society recommends that a testicular
examination should be part of a general physical examination.52 The American Cancer Society does not have a recommendation for regular testicular
self-examinations (TSEs), but does advise men to seek clinical attention for any
of the following: a painless lump, swelling, or enlargement in either testicle;
pain or discomfort in a testicle or the scrotum; a feeling of heaviness or a sudden ﬂuid collection in the scrotum; or a dull ache in the lower abdomen or
the groin.

See pp. 555–556 for patient instructions for TSE.

Techniques of Examination
Many students feel uneasy about examining the male genitalia. “How will the
patient react?” “Will he let me examine him?” “Will he have an erection?”
Explain what is involved and review each step of the examination so that the
patient feels reassured and knows what to expect. When needed, request an
assistant to accompany you. Occasionally, if the patient has an erection, explain
that this is a normal response, ﬁnish your examination, and proceed with a
calm demeanor. If the patient refuses the examination, respect the patient’s
wishes.
For a good genital examination the gowned patient can be either standing or
supine. To check for varicoceles, however, the patient should stand, and you
should sit comfortably on a chair or stool. The gown should cover the patient’s
550

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
chest and abdomen. Place a drawsheet at the midthigh. Wear gloves throughout
the examination. Expose the genitalia and inguinal areas. For younger patients,
review the sexual maturity ratings on p. 899.

The Penis
Inspection.

Inspect the penis, including:

See Table 13-2, Abnormalities of the
Penis and Scrotum, p. 558.

■ The skin. Inspect the skin on the ventral and dorsal surfaces and the base

of the penis for excoriations or inflammation, lifting the penis when
necessary.
■ The prepuce (foreskin). If present, retract the prepuce or ask the patient to

retract it. This step is essential for the detection of chancres and carcinomas. Smegma, a cheesy, whitish material, may accumulate normally under
the foreskin.

Pubic or genital excoriations suggest
lice (crabs) or sometimes scabies in
the pubic hair.
Phimosis is a tight prepuce that cannot
be retracted over the glans. Paraphimosis is a tight prepuce that, once retracted,
cannot be returned. Edema ensues.

■ The glans. Look for any ulcers, scars, nodules, or signs of inﬂammation.

Balanitis is inflammation of the glans;
balanoposthitis is inflammation of the
glans and prepuce.

■ The urethral meatus. Inspect the location of the urethral meatus.

Hypospadias is a congenital ventral
displacement of the meatus on the
penis (see p. 558).

Compress the glans gently between
your index ﬁnger above and your
thumb below (Fig. 13-3). This maneuver should open the urethral meatus
and allow you to inspect it for discharge. Normally, there is none.
If the patient has reported a discharge
that you are unable to see, ask him to
strip, or milk, the shaft of the penis
from its base to the glans. Alternatively,
do this yourself. This maneuver may
expel some discharge from the urethral
meatus for appropriate examination.
Have a glass slide and culture materials
ready.

Profuse yellow discharge signals
gonococcal urethritis; scanty white or
clear discharge signals nongonococcal
urethritis. Definitive diagnosis
requires Gram stain and culture.
F I G U R E 1 3 - 3 . Gently compress the
glans to inspect the urethral meatus.

Palpation. Palpate the shaft of the penis between your thumb and ﬁrst two
ﬁngers, noting any induration. (This may be omitted in a young asymptomatic
male patient.) Palpate any abnormality of the penis, noting any induration or
tenderness.

If you retract the foreskin, replace it before proceeding on to examine the scrotum.
C H A P T E R 13

Induration along the ventral surface
of the penis suggests a urethral stricture or possibly a carcinoma. Tenderness in the indurated area suggests
periurethral inflammation from a
urethral stricture.

| Male Genitalia and Hernias

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

551

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

The Scrotum and its Contents
Inspection.

Inspect the scrotum, including:

■ The skin. Lift up the scrotum so that you can inspect its posterior surface.

Note any lesions or scars. Inspect the pubic hair distribution.

■ The scrotal contours. Inspect for swelling, lumps, veins, bulging masses, or

asymmetry of the left and right hemiscrotum.

■ The inguinal areas. Note any erythema, excoriation, or visible adenopathy.

See Table 13-2, Abnormalities of the
Penis and Scrotum, p. 558.
Inspection may reveal scrotal nevi,
hemangiomas, or telangiectasias as
well as STIs including condyloma or
ulcers from herpes and chancroid (painful) and syphilis and lymphogranuloma
venereum (painless), with associated
inguinal lymphadenopathy.53
A poorly developed scrotum on one or
both sides suggests cryptorchidism (an
undescended testicle). Common scrotal swellings include indirect inguinal
hernias, hydroceles, scrotal edema, and,
rarely, testicular carcinoma.
Erythema and mild excoriation point
to fungal infection, not uncommon in
this moist area.

There may be dome-shaped white or yellow
papules or nodules formed by occluded follicles ﬁlled with keratin debris of desquamated
follicular epithelium. Such epidermoid cysts are
common, frequently multiple, and benign
(Fig. 13-4).

F I G U R E 1 3 - 4 . Epidermoid cysts.

Palpation. If using a one-handed
technique, palpate each testis and epididymis
between your thumb and ﬁrst two ﬁngers
(Fig. 13-5). If using two hands, cradle the
testis at both poles in the thumb and
ﬁngertips of both hands. Palpate the scrotal
contents as you gently slide them back and
forth from the ﬁngertips of one hand to the
other, without changing the position of your
hands as they cup the scrotum. This
technique is comfortable for the patient and
allows a subtle controlled and accurate
examination. The testes should be ﬁrm but
not hard, descended, symmetric, nontender,
and without masses.53

552

See Table 13-3, Abnormalities of
the Testis, p. 559, and Table 13-4,
Abnormalities of the Epididymis
and Spermatic Cord, p. 560.
Tender painful scrotal swelling is
present in acute epididymitis, acute
orchitis, torsion of the spermatic cord,
or a strangulated inguinal hernia.

F I G U R E 1 3 - 5 . Palpate the
testis and epididymis.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ For each testis, assess size, shape, consistency, and tenderness; feel for any

nodules. Pressure on the testis normally produces a deep visceral pain.
■ Palpate the epididymis on the posterior surface of each testicle without

applying excess pressure, which can cause discomfort. The epididymis feels
nodular and cord-like and should not be confused with an abnormal lump.
Normally, it should not be tender.

■ Palpate each spermatic cord, includ-

Any painless nodule on the testis
raises the possibility of testicular
cancer, a potentially curable cancer
with a peak incidence between the
ages 15 to 34 years. Recall that
lymph drainage from the testes parallels retroperitoneal venous flow
from the renal vein and inferior vena
cava, the primary site of lymph node
involvement in testicular cancer
(see p. 516).
To check for a varicocele, with the
patient standing, palpate the spermatic cord about 2 cm above the testis. Have the patient hold his breath
and “bear down” against a closed
glottis for about 4 seconds (the
Valsalva maneuver).

ing the vas deferens, between your
thumb and ﬁngers, from the epididymis to the external inguinal
ring (Fig. 13-6). The vas feels
slightly stiff and tubular and is distinct from the accompanying vessels
of the spermatic cord.

During this maneuver, a temporary
increase in the diameter of the spermatic cord indicates filling of abnormally dilated spermatic veins draining
the testis.

FIGURE 13-6.
spermatic cord.

Palpate the

■ Palpate any nodules or swellings.

The vas deferens, if chronically
infected, may feel thickened or
beaded. A cystic structure in the
spermatic cord suggests a hydrocele
of the cord.

Swelling in the scrotum apart from the testicles can be evaluated by transillumination. After darkening the room, shine the beam of a strong ﬂashlight from
behind the scrotum through the mass. Look for transmission of the light as a red
glow.

Hernias

Swellings containing serous fluid,
such as hydroceles, light up with a red
glow, or transilluminate. Those containing blood or tissue, such as a normal testis, a tumor, or most hernias,
do not.

During the examination for hernias, the patient can be either supine or standing. The techniques for examination and examiner hand placement are the
same for both positions. The techniques which follow apply to the standing
position, but can be replicated for the supine position depending on examiner
preference.

C H A P T E R 13

| Male Genitalia and Hernias

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

553

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Inspection. Sitting comfortably in front of the patient, with the patient
standing and an assistant present, if indicated, inspect the inguinal regions and
genitalia for bulging areas and asymmetry.

A bulge suggests a hernia.

Palpation. Palpate for an inguinal hernia, using the techniques below.
Continue to face the patient, who should still be standing.

See Table 13-5, Course, Presentation,
and Differentiation of Hernias in the
Groin, p. 561.

■ To examine for an inguinal hernia on either side (the right is illustrated in

Fig. 13-7), place the tip of your dominant index ﬁnger at the anterior inferior
margin of the scrotum, staying superﬁcial to the testicle, then move your
ﬁnger and hand upward toward the external inguinal ring, invaginating the
scrotal skin beneath the peripubic fat pad next to the base of the penis.

Inguinal
ligament
External
inguinal
ring

FIGURE 13-7.

Invaginate the scrotum.

■ Follow the spermatic cord upward to the inguinal ligament. Find the trian-

gular slit-like opening of the external inguinal ring just above and lateral to
the pubic tubercle. Palpate the external inguinal ring and its ﬂoor. Ask the
patient to cough. Palpate for a distinct bulge or mass that moves against your
stationary ﬁnger during the cough.
■ The external ring may be large enough for you to gently palpate obliquely

along the inguinal canal toward the internal inguinal ring. Again ask the patient to cough. Check for a bulge that slides down the inguinal canal and taps
against the ﬁngertip.
■ Use the same techniques with the same dominant ﬁnger to examine both

sides.

A bulge near the external inguinal
ring suggests a direct inguinal hernia.
A bulge near the internal inguinal ring
suggests an indirect inguinal hernia.
Experts note that distinguishing the
type of hernia is difficult, with sensitivity and specificity of 74% to 92%,
and 93%. Hernias warrant surgical
evaluation, especially when symptomatic or incarcerated. Chance of
incarceration is low, estimated at 0.3%
to 3% per year, and is 10 times more
common with indirect hernias.54–57

Palpate for a femoral hernia by placing your ﬁngers on the anterior thigh in the
region of the femoral canal. Ask the patient to strain down again or cough. Note
any swelling or tenderness.
Evaluating a Possible Scrotal Hernia. To assess a scrotal mass and possible hernia, ask the patient to lie down. The mass may return to the abdomen
by itself. If so, it is a hernia. If not:
554

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Can you get your ﬁngers above the mass in the scrotum?

If you can place your fingers above
the mass, suspect a hydrocele.

■ Listen to the mass with a stethoscope for bowel sounds, but note that bowel

Transillumination of the scrotal mass
may help identify a hydrocele from an
intestine-containing hernia.

sounds may be transmitted from the abdomen through a hydrocele in the
scrotum.
If your ﬁndings suggest a hernia, gently try to reduce it (return it to the abdominal cavity) by sustained pressure with your ﬁngers. Do not attempt this maneuver if the mass is tender or the patient reports nausea and vomiting.
The history may be helpful. The patient can usually tell you what happens to his
swelling when lying down and may be able to demonstrate how he reduces it
himself.

A hernia is incarcerated when its
contents cannot be returned to the
abdominal cavity. A hernia is
strangulated when the blood supply
to the entrapped contents is
compromised. Suspect strangulation
in the presence of tenderness, nausea,
and vomiting, and consider surgical
intervention. See Table 13-5, Course,
Presentation, and Differentiation of
Hernias in the Groin, p. 561.

Special Techniques
The Testicular Self-Examination. The incidence of testicular cancer is
low, about 5 per 100,000 men, but it is the most common solid cancer of young
men between ages 15 and 34 years, with an estimated lifetime risk of 1:260.58
Although the USPSTF and the American Cancer Society have not recommended
routine TSE for screening, the clinician and patient may wish to teach the TSE to
enhance health awareness and self-care. For high-risk patients, review the risk
factors for testicular carcinoma, which has an excellent prognosis when detected
early: cryptorchidism, which confers a high risk for testicular carcinoma in the
undescended testicle; a history of carcinoma in the contralateral testicle; mumps
orchitis; an inguinal hernia; a hydrocele in childhood; and a positive family history.

Patient Instructions for the Testicular
Self-Examination
This examination is best performed after a warm bath or shower.59,60 This way,
the scrotal skin is warm and relaxed. It is best to do the test while standing.
● Standing in front of a mirror, check
for any swelling on the skin of the
scrotum.
● With the penis out of the way, gently
feel your scrotal sac to locate a testicle. Examine each testicle separately.
● Use one hand to stabilize the testicle.
Using the ﬁngers and thumb of your
other hand, ﬁrmly but gently feel or
roll the testicle between your ﬁngers.
Feel the entire surface. Find the
epididymis. This is a soft, tube-like

(continued )

C H A P T E R 13

| Male Genitalia and Hernias

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

555

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Patient Instructions for the Testicular
Self-Examination (continued )
structure at the back of the testicle that collects and carries sperm, and is not
an abnormal lump. Check the other testicle and epididymis the same way.
● If you ﬁnd a hard lump, an absent or enlarged testicle, a painful swollen scrotum, or any other diﬀerences that do not seem normal, do not wait. See your
health care provider right away.
As noted by the American Cancer Society, “It’s normal for one testicle to be
slightly larger than the other, and for one to hang lower than the other. You
should also know that each normal testicle has a small, coiled tube (epididymis)
that can feel like a small bump on the upper or middle outer side of the testicle.
Normal testicles also have blood vessels, supporting tissues, and tubes that
carry sperm. Some men may confuse these with abnormal lumps at ﬁrst. If you
have any concerns, ask your doctor or clinician.”

Recording Your Findings
Note that initially you may use sentences to describe your ﬁndings; later you will
use phrases. The style below contains phrases appropriate for most write-ups.
Recording the Male Genitalia Examination
“Circumcised male. No penile discharge or lesions. No scrotal swelling or discoloration. Testes descended bilaterally, smooth, without masses. Epididymis is
nontender. No inguinal or femoral hernias.”
OR
“Uncircumcised male; prepuce easily retractible. No penile discharge or lesions.
No scrotal swelling or discoloration. Testes descended bilaterally; right testicle
smooth; 1 × 1 cm ﬁrm nodule on left lateral testicle. It is ﬁxed and nontender.
Epididymis nontender. No inguinal or femoral hernias.”

556

These findings are suspicious for testicular carcinoma, the most common
form of cancer in men between the
ages of 15 and 34 years.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 13-1 Sexually Transmitted Infections of Male Genitalia

Genital Warts (Condylomata Acuminata)
■ Appearance: Single or multiple papules or plaques of variable
shapes; may be round, acuminate (pointed), or thin and
slender. May be raised, ﬂat, or cauliﬂower-like (verrucous).
■ Causative organism: HPV, usually subtypes 6, 11; carcinogenic
subtypes rare, approximately 5–10% of all anogenital warts.
Incubation: weeks to months; infected contact may have no
visible warts.
■ Can arise on penis, scrotum, groin, thighs, anus; usually
asymptomatic, occasionally cause itching and pain.
■ May disappear without treatment.

Genital Herpes Simplex
■ Appearance: Small scattered or grouped vesicles, 1 to 3 mm
in size, on glans or shaft of penis. Appear as erosions if
vesicular membrane breaks.
■ Causative organism: Usually Herpes simplex virus 2 (90%), a
double-stranded DNA virus. Incubation: 2 to 7 days after
exposure.
■ Primary episode may be asymptomatic; recurrence usually
less painful, of shorter duration.
■ Associated with fever, malaise, headache, arthralgias; local
pain and edema, lymphadenopathy.
■ Need to distinguish from genital herpes zoster (usually in
older patients with dermatomal distribution) and candidiasis.

Primary Syphilis
■ Appearance: Small red papule that becomes a chancre, a
painless erosion up to 2 cm in diameter. Base of chancre is
clean, red, smooth, and glistening; borders are raised and
indurated. Chancre heals within 3 to 8 wks.
■ Causative organism: Treponema pallidum, a spirochete.
Incubation: 9–90 d after exposure.
■ May develop inguinal lymphadenopathy within 7 d; lymph
nodes are rubbery, nontender, mobile.
■ 20%–30% of patients develop secondary syphilis while
chancre still present (suggests coinfection with HIV).
■ Distinguish from: genital herpes simplex; chancroid;
granuloma inguinale from Klebsiella granulomatis (rare in the
United States; four variants, so difﬁcult to identify).

Chancroid
■ Appearance: Red papule or pustule initially, then forms a
painful deep ulcer with ragged nonindurated margins;
contains necrotic exudate, has a friable base.
■ Causative organism: Haemophilus ducreyi, an anaerobic
bacillus. Incubation: 3–7 d after exposure.
■ Painful inguinal adenopathy; suppurative buboes in 25% of
patients.
■ Need to distinguish from: primary syphilis; genital herpes
simplex; lymphogranuloma venereum, granuloma inguinale
from Klebsiella granulomatis (both rare in the United States).

C H A P T E R 13

| Male Genitalia and Hernias

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

557

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 13-2 Abnormalities of the Penis and Scrotum

Hypospadias
A congenital displacement of the urethral meatus to the inferior
surface of the penis. The meatus may be subcoronal, midshaft,
or at the junction of the penis and scrotum (penoscrotal).

Scrotal Edema
Pitting edema may make the scrotal skin taut; seen in heart
failure or nephrotic syndrome.

Fingers can
palpate above
mass

Peyronie Disease
Palpable, nontender, hard plaques are found just beneath the
skin, usually along the dorsum of the penis. The patient
complains of crooked, painful erections.

Hydrocele
A nontender, ﬂuid-ﬁlled mass within the tunica vaginalis. It
transilluminates, and the examining ﬁngers can palpate above
the mass within the scrotum.

Fingers cannot
get above
mass

Carcinoma of the Penis
An indurated nodule or ulcer that is usually nontender.
Limited almost completely to men who are not circumcised, it
may be masked by the prepuce. Any persistent penile sore is
suspicious.

558

Scrotal Hernia
Usually an indirect inguinal hernia that comes through the
external inguinal ring, so the examining ﬁngers cannot get
above it within the scrotum.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 13-3 Abnormalities of the Testis

Cryptorchidism
The testis is atrophied and lies outside
the scrotum in the inguinal canal,
abdomen, or near the pubic tubercle; it
may also be congenitally absent. There is
no palpable left testis or epididymis in
the unﬁlled scrotum. Cryptorchidism,
even with surgical correction, markedly
raises the risk of testicular cancer.61

Small Testis
In adults, testicular length is usually
≤3.5 cm. Small ﬁrm testes usually
≤2 cm suggest Klinefelter syndrome.
Small soft testes suggesting atrophy are
seen in cirrhosis, myotonic dystrophy,
use of estrogens, and hypopituitarism;
may also follow orchitis.

Acute Orchitis
The testis is acutely inﬂamed, painful,
tender, and swollen. It may be difﬁcult
to distinguish from the epididymis. The
scrotum may be reddened. Seen in
mumps and other viral infections;
usually unilateral.

Early
Late

Tumor of the Testis
Usually appears as a painless nodule.
Any nodule within the testis warrants
investigation for malignancy.

As a testicular neoplasm grows and
spreads, it may seem to replace the
entire organ. The testicle characteristically
feels heavier than normal.

C H A P T E R 13

| Male Genitalia and Hernias

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

559

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 13-4 Abnormalities
of the Epididymis and
Spermatic Cord

Spermatocele and Cyst of the Epididymis
A painless, movable cystic mass just above the testis suggests
a spermatocele or an epididymal cyst. Both transilluminate.
The former contains sperm, and the latter does not, but they
are clinically indistinguishable.
Varicocele of the Spermatic Cord
Varicocele refers to gravity-mediated varicose veins of the
spermatic cord, usually found on the left. It feels like a soft
“bag of worms” in the spermatic cord above the testis, and if
prominent, appears to distort the contours of the scrotal skin.
A varicocele collapses in the supine position, so examination
should be both supine and standing. If the varicocele does
not collapse when the patient is supine, suspect a left
spermatic vein obstruction within the abdomen.
Acute Epididymitis
An acutely inﬂamed epididymis is indurated, swollen, and
notably tender, making it difﬁcult to distinguish from the
testis. The scrotum may be reddened and the vas deferens
inﬂamed. Causes include infection from Neisseria gonorrheae,
Chlamydia trachomatis (younger adults), Escherichia coli, and
Pseudomonas (older adults); trauma; and autoimmune
disease. Barring urinary symptoms, urinalysis is often
negative.
Torsion of the Spermatic Cord
Torsion, or twisting, of the testicle on its spermatic cord
produces an acutely painful, tender, and swollen organ that is
often retracted upward in the scrotum. The cremasteric reﬂex
is nearly always absent on the affected side in boys or men
with testicular torsion. If the presentation is delayed, the
scrotum becomes red and edematous. There is no associated
urinary infection. Torsion is most common in neonates and
adolescents, but can occur at any age. It is a surgical
emergency because of obstructed circulation.
Tuberculous Epididymitis
The chronic inﬂammation of tuberculosis produces a ﬁrm
enlargement of the epididymis, which is sometimes tender,
with thickening or beading of the vas deferens.

560

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 13-5 Course,
Presentation, and Differentiation
of Hernias in the Groin

Internal inguinal ring
COURSE AND
PRESENTATION OF
FEMORAL HERNIA

Inguinal canal

COURSE AND
PRESENTATION
OF DIRECT
INGUINAL HERNIA

Femoral artery
Femoral vein

COURSE AND
PRESENTATION
OF INDIRECT
INGUINAL HERNIA

External inguinal ring

Inguinal Hernias
Indirect

Direct

Femoral Hernias

Frequency, Age, and
Sex

Most common, all ages, both
sexes. Often in children; may
occur in adults.

Less common. Usually in
men older than 40 yrs; rare
in women.

Least common. More common
in women than in men.

Point of Origin

Above inguinal ligament, near
its midpoint (the internal
inguinal ring).

Above inguinal ligament,
close to the pubic tubercle
(near the external inguinal
ring).

Below the inguinal ligament;
appears more lateral than an
inguinal hernia. Can be hard
to differentiate from lymph
nodes.

Course

Often into the scrotum.
The hernia comes down the
inguinal canal and touches the
ﬁngertip.

Rarely into the scrotum.
The hernia bulges anteriorly
and pushes the side of the
ﬁnger forward.

Never into the scrotum.
The inguinal canal is empty.

(Examining ﬁnger in inguinal
canal during coughing or
straining)

C H A P T E R 13

| Male Genitalia and Hernias

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

561

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
REFERENCES

References
1. Turner D, Driemeyer W, Nieder T, et al. How much sex do medical
students need? A survey of the knowledge and interest in sexual
medicine of medical students. Psychother Psychosom Med Psychol.
2014;64:452.
2. Lapinski J, Sexton P. Still in the closet: the invisible minority in
medical education. BMC Med Educ. 2014;14:171.
3. Moll J, Krieger P, Moreno-Walton L, et al. The prevalence of lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender health education and training
in emergency medicine residency programs: what do we know?
Acad Merg Med. 2014;21:608.
4. Sack S, Drabant B, Perrin E. Communicating about sexuality: an
initiative across the core clerkships. Acad Med. 2002;77:1159.
5. Rutherford K, McIntyre J, Daley A, et al. Development of expertise
in mental health service provision for lesbian, gay, bisexual and
transgender communities. Med Educ. 2012;46:903.
6. Kellaher D. Sexual behavior and autism spectrum disorders: an
update and discussion. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2015;17:562.
7. Bonﬁls K, Firmin R, Salyers M, et al. Sexuality and intimacy among
people living with serious mental illnesses: factors contributing to
sexual activity. Psychiatr Rehabil J. 2015;38:249.
8. Turner D, Schottle D, Krueger R, et al. Sexual behavior and its correlates after traumatic brain injury. Curr Opin Psychiatry. 2015;
28:180.
9. Lee D, Nazroo J, O’Connor D, et al. Sexual health and well-being
among older men and women in England: ﬁnding from the English longitudinal study of ageing. Arch Sex Behav. 2016;45:133.
2015 January 27. Epub ahead of print.
10. Barbara AM, Doctor F, Chaim G. Asking the right questions 2. Talking with clients about sexual orientation and gender identity in
mental health, counselling and addiction settings. Toronto Canada:
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health; 2007. Available at http://
knowledgex.camh.net/amhspecialists/Screening_Assessment/
assessment/ARQ2/Pages/default.aspx. Accessed May 20, 2015.
11. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexual orientation and
health among U.S. adults. National Health Interview Survey, 2013.
Available at http://www.cdc.gov/lgbthealth/. Accessed May 10,
2015.
12. Gates GJ, Newport F. Gallup Special Report: The US LGBT adult
population. Washington, DC: Gallup, Inc; 2013. See also Gates GJ,
Newport F. Special Report: 3.4% of U.S. Adults Identify as LGBT.
October 18, 2012. Available at http://www.gallup.com/poll/158066/
special-report-adults-identify-lgbt.aspx. Accessed May 11, 2015.
13. Gates GJ. Demographics and LGBT health. J Health Soc Behav.
2013;54:72.
14. U.S. Census Bureau. Same sex couples. 2013. Available at http://
www.census.gov/hhes/samesex./ Accessed May 10, 2015.
15. Institute of Medicine. The Health of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and
Transgender People: Building a Foundation for Better Understanding.
Washington, DC: National Institutes of Health; 2011. See also
Report at https://www.iom.edu/Reports/2011/The-Health-of-Lesbian-Gay-Bisexual-and-Transgender-People.aspx March 31 2011.
Accessed May 11, 2015.
16. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Lesbian and bisexual
women. Updated March 25, 2014. Available at http://www.cdc.
gov/lgbthealth/women.htm. Gay and bisexual men. Updated
March 25, 2014. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/lgbthealth/msm.
htm. Accessed May 10, 2015.

562

17. Centers for Disease Prevention and Control. CDC fact sheet. HIV
among gay and bisexual men. March 2015. Available at http://
www.cdc.gov/msmhealth/. Accessed May 10, 2015.
18. Matarazzo BB, Barnes SM, Pease JL, et al. Suicide risk among lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender military personnel and veterans: what does the literature tell us? Suicide Life Threat Behav.
2014;44:200.
19. Haas AP, Eliason M, Mays VM, et al. Suicide and suicide risk in
lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender populations: review and
recommendations. J Homosex. 2011;58:10.
20. Daniel H, Butkus R, for the Health and Public Policy Committee of
the American College of Physicians. Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender health disparities: Executive summary of a policy
position paper from the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern
Med. 2015;163:135.
21. Durso LE, Meyer IH. Patterns and predictors of disclosure of sexual orientation to healthcare providers among lesbians, gay men,
and bisexuals. Sex Res Social Policy. 2013;10:35.
22. Polek CA, Hardie TL, Crowley EM. Lesbians’ disclosure of sexual
orientation and satisfaction with care. J Transcult Nurs. 2008;19:243.
23. Friedman MR, Dodge B, Schick V, et al. From bias to bisexual
health disparities: attitudes toward bisexual men and women in
the United States. LGBT Health. 2014;1:309.
24. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Lesbian, gay, bisexual,
and transgender health. Updates July 22 2014. Available at http://
www.cdc.gov/lgbthealth./ Accessed May 11, 2015.
25. National LGBT Health Education Center. Suggested resources and
readings, 2015. Available at http://www.lgbthealtheducation.org/
publications/lgbt-health-resources./ Accessed May 11, 2015.
26. Strutz KL, Herring AH, Halpern CT. Health disparities among
young adult sexual minorities in the U.S. Am J Prev Med. 2015;
48:76.
27. Gareri P, Castagna A, Francomano D. Erectile dysfunction in the
elderly: an old widespread issue with novel treatment perspectives.
Int J Endocrin. 2014;2014:878670.
28. Liu G, Hariri S, Bradley H, et al. Trends and patterns of sexual
behaviors among adolescents and adults aged 14 to 59 years,
United States. Sex Transm Dis. 2015;42:20.
29. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted
diseases. Draft for Public Comment Version: Sexually Transmitted
Diseases Treatment Guidelines, 2014. Updated November 12,
2014. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment/update.htm.
Accessed May 11, 2015.
30. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. USPSTF recommendations for
STI screening. February 2014. Available at http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name/uspstf-recommendations-forsti-screening. Accessed May 11, 2015.
31. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Human immunodeﬁciency
virus (HIV) infection: Screening. April 2013. Available at http://
www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Topic/recommendation-summary/human-immunodeficiency-virus-hiv-infectionscreening?ds=1&s=HIV. Accessed May 11, 2015.
32. Skarbinski J, Rosenberg E, Paz-Bailey G, et al. Human Immunodeﬁciency virus transmission at each step of the care continuum in
the United States. JAMA Intern Med. 2015;175:588.
33. Meanley S, Gale A, Harmell C, et al. The role of provider interactions on comprehensive sexual healthcare among young men who
have sex with men. AIDS Educ Prev. 2015;27:15.
34. Institute of Medicine, Eng TR, Butler WT, eds. The Hidden Epidemic: Confronting Sexually Transmitted Diseases: Summary.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
REFERENCES
Washington, DC: National Academies Press (US); 1997. Available
at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25165803. Accessed
May 12, 2015.
35. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually Transmitted
Disease Surveillance 2013. Atlanta: U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services; 2014. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/std/
stats13/default.htm. Accessed May 11, 2015.
36. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC Fact Sheet.
Reported STDs in the United States. 2013 National Data for Chlamydia, Gonorrhea, and Syphilis, 2014. Available at: http://www.
cdc.gov/nchhstp/newsroom/docs/std-trends-508.pdf. Accessed
May 11, 2015.
37. LeFevre ML. Screening for Chlamydia and gonorrhea: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern
Med. 2014;161:902.
38. Markowitz LE, Dunne EF, Saraiya M, et al. Human papillomavirus
vaccination: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Recomm Rep. 2014;63(RR-05):1.
39. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC Fact Sheet.
Reported STDs in the United States. 2013 National Data for Chlamydia, Gonorrhea, and Syphilis, 2014. Available at: http://www.
cdc.gov/nchhstp/newsroom/docs/std-trends-508.pdf. Accessed
May 11, 2015.
40. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. HIV in the United
States: At a Glance, March 2015. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/
hiv/pdf/statistics_basics_ataglance_factsheet.pdf. Accessed May 12,
2015.
41. Bradley H, Hall HI, Wolitski RJ, et al. Vital Signs: HIV diagnosis,
care, and treatment among persons living with HIV—United
States, 2011. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2014;63:1113.
42. Moyer VA. Screening for HIV: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
Recommendation Statement. Ann Intern Med. 2013;159:51.
43. Branson BM, Handsﬁeld HH, Lampe MA, et al. Revised recommendations for HIV testing of adults, adolescents, and pregnant
women in health-care settings. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2006;55(RR14):1.
44. Qaseem A, Snow V, Shekelle P, et al. Screening for HIV in health
care settings: a guidance statement from the American College of
Physicians and HIV Medicine Association. Ann Intern Med. 2009;
150:125.
45. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. CDC Fact Sheet. HIV
Testing in the United States, 2014. Available at http://www.cdc.
gov/nchhstp/newsroom/docs/HIV-Testing-US-508.pdf. Accessed
May 12, 2015.
46. Workowski KA, Berman S. Sexually transmitted diseases treatment
guidelines, 2010. MMWR Recomm Rep. 2010;59(RR-12):1.

47. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Condom Effectiveness. Condom Fact Sheet in Brief, 2013. Available at: http://www.
cdc.gov/condomeffectiveness/brief.html. Accessed May 12,
2015.
48. Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2015. CA Cancer J
Clin. 2015;65:5.
49. Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, et al. SEER Cancer Statistics Review,
1975–2011. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute; 2014. Available at
http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2011./ Accessed May 12, 2015.
50. National Cancer Institute. Testicular Cancer Screening (PDQ®).
Description of the evidence; 2014. Available at http://www.cancer.
gov/cancertopics/pdq/screening/testicular/HealthProfessional/
page2. Accessed May 12, 2015.
51. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for testicular cancer: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force reafﬁrmation recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2011;154:483.
52. American Cancer Society. Testicular Cancer Overview, 2014. Available at http://www.cancer.org/cancer/testicularcancer/overviewguide./ Accessed May 2, 2015.
53. Montgomery JS, Bloom DA. The diagnosis and management of
scrotal masses. Med Clin North Am. 2011;95:235.
54. Simons MP, Aufenacker T, Bay-Nielsen M, et al. European Hernia
Society guidelines on the treatment of inguinal hernia in adult
patients. Hernia. 2009;13:343.
55. Miserez M, Peeters E, Aufenacker T, et al. Update with level 1 studies of the European Hernia Society guidelines on the treatment of
inguinal hernia in adult patients. Hernia. 2014;18:151.
56. Kraft BM, Kolb H, Kuckuk B, et al. Diagnosis and classiﬁcation of
inguinal hernias. Surg Endosc. 2003;17:2021.
57. Van den Berg JC, de Valois JC, Go PM, et al. Detection of groin
hernia with physical examination, ultrasound, and MRI compared
with laparoscopic ﬁndings. Invest Radiol. 1999;34:739.
58. Aberger M, Wilson B, Holzbeierlein JM, et al. Testicular self-examination and testicular cancer: a cost-utility analysis. Cancer Med.
2014;3:1629.
59. American Cancer Society. Testicular self-exam. Updated January 21,
2015. Available at http://www.cancer.org/cancer/testicularcancer/
moreinformation/doihavetesticularcancer/do-i-have-testicularcancer-self-exam. Accessed May 13, 2015.
60. U.S. National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health.
MedlinePlus—Testicular self-exam. Updated December 27 2013.
Available at http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/
003909.htm. Accessed May 13, 2015.
61. Kolon TF, Herndon CD, Baker LA, et al; American Urological Association. Evaluation and treatment of cryptorchidism: AUA guideline. J Urol. 2014;192:337.

C H A P T E R 13

| Male Genitalia and Hernias

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

563

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

C H A P T E R

14

Female Genitalia
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (Vol. 15: Female Genitalia, Anus, and Rectum)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com

Anatomy and Physiology
Knowing the basics of pelvic anatomy will enhance your examination skills and
improve your detection of abnormal ﬁndings. Begin by reviewing the anatomy of the
external female genitalia, or vulva (Fig. 14-1). Note the mons pubis, a hair-covered fat
pad overlying the symphysis pubis; the labia majora, rounded folds of adipose tissue
forming the outer lips of the vagina; the labia minora, the thinner pinkish-red folds
or inner lips that extend anteriorly to form the prepuce; and the clitoris. The vestibule
Mons pubis
Labia majora

Prepuce
Clitoris

Labia minora

Urethral meatus
Hymen
Opening of
paraurethral
(Skene) gland

Vagina

Vestibule
Opening of
Bartholin gland

Introitus
Perineum

Anus

FIGURE 14-1.

External female genitalia.

C H A P T E R 14

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| Female Genitalia

565

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
is the boat-shaped fossa between the labia
minora. In its posterior portion lies the vaginal opening, the introitus, which in virgins
may be hidden by the hymen. The term
perineum refers to the tissue between the
introitus and the anus.
The urethral meatus opens into the vestibule between the clitoris and the vagina.
Just posterior and adjacent to the meatus
on either side lie the openings of the paraurethral (Skene) glands.
The openings of Bartholin glands are
located posteriorly on both sides of the
vaginal opening but are not usually visible (Fig. 14-2). The glands themselves are
situated more deeply.

Location of
Bartholin glands

FIGURE 14-2.

Bartholin glands.

See Table 14-1, Lesions of the Vulva,
p. 596, and Table 14-2, Bulges and
Swelling of the Vulva, Vagina, and
Urethra, p. 597.

The vagina is a musculomembranous tube extending upward and posteriorly
between the urinary bladder and urethra and the rectum. Its upper third lies at
a horizontal plane and terminates in the cup-shaped fornix. The vaginal mucosa
lies in transverse folds, or rugae.
The vagina lies at almost a right angle to the uterus, a thick-walled ﬁbromuscular
structure shaped like an inverted pear (Fig. 14-3). Its convex upper surface is the
uterine fundus. The body of the uterus, or corpus, and the cylindrical cervix are
joined inferiorly at the isthmus. The uterine walls contain three layers: the perimetrium, with its serosal coating from the perineum; the myometrium of distensible smooth muscle; and the endometrium, the adherent inner coating. The
Ovary
Fallopian
tube

Sacrum
Rectouterine
pouch
Rectum

Uterus

Isthmus
of uterus

Bladder

Posterior
fornix
Cervix

Anterior
fornix

Vagina

Urethra
Introitus

Perineum

FIGURE 14-3.

566

Pelvic anatomy—sagittal view.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
cervix protrudes into the vagina, dividing the upper vagina into three recesses,
the anterior, posterior, and lateral fornices.
The vaginal surface of the cervix, the ectocervix, is seen easily with the help of a
speculum (Fig. 14-4). At its center is a round, oval, or slit-like depression, the
external os of the cervix, which marks the opening into the endocervical canal.
The ectocervix is covered by plushy red columnar epithelium that surrounds the
os and lines the endocervical canal, and by shiny pink squamous epithelium continuous with the vaginal lining. The squamocolumnar junction forms the boundary
between these two types of epithelium. During puberty, the broad band of
columnar epithelium encircling the os, called ectropion, is gradually replaced by
squamous epithelium. The squamocolumnar junction migrates toward the os,
creating the transformation zone. This is the area at risk for later dysplasia which
is sampled by the Papanicolaou, or Pap, smear.
External os of
the cervix

Columnar epithelium

Squamocolumnar junction

Transformation
zone

Squamous epithelium

FIGURE 14-4.

Cervical epithelia and transformation zone.

A fallopian tube with a fanlike tip, the ﬁmbria, extends from the ovary to each side
of the uterus, and conducts the oocyte from the periovarian peritoneal cavity to
the uterine cavity (Fig. 14-5). The two ovaries are almond-shaped glands that
vary considerably in size but average approximately 3.5 × 2 × 1.5 cm from adulthood through menopause. The ovaries are palpable on pelvic examination in
roughly half of women during the reproductive years. Normally, the fallopian
tubes are not palpable. The term adnexa, a plural Latin word meaning “appendages,” refers to the ovaries, tubes, and supporting tissues.
Uterine Fundus
cavity of uterus

Round
ligament

Fallopian tube

Body of
uterus
Fimbriae

Isthmus
Ligament
of ovary

Myometrium
Endometrium

Cervix

Ovary
(sectioned)
Cervical canal
Cervical os

FIGURE 14-5.

Pelvic anatomy—cross-sectional view.

C H A P T E R 14

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| Female Genitalia

567

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
The ovaries have two primary functions: the production of oocytes and the secretion of hormones, including estrogen, progesterone, and testosterone. Increased
hormonal secretion during puberty stimulates the growth of the uterus and its
endometrial lining, enlargement of the vagina, thickening of the vaginal epithelium, and the development of secondary sex characteristics, including the breasts
and pubic hair.
The parietal peritoneum extends downward behind the uterus into a cul-de-sac
called the rectouterine pouch (pouch of Douglas). You can just reach this area on
rectovaginal examination.
The greater pelvis, protected by the bony wings of the ilia, contains the lower
abdominal viscera, then narrows inferiorly at the lesser pelvis, which surrounds
the pelvic cavity and the perineum. The anatomy and innervation of the pelvis
and pelvic organs are complex, but involve several common symptoms and disorders, so review the following text and ﬁgures carefully.1,2
The pelvic organs are supported by a sling of tissues composed of muscle, ligaments, and endopelvic fascia called the pelvic ﬂoor, which helps support the
pelvic organs above the outlet of the lesser pelvis (Fig. 14-6). Pelvic ﬂoor muscles
also aid in sexual function (orgasm), urinary and fecal continence, and stabilization of connecting joints. The pelvic ﬂoor consists of the pelvic diaphragm and
the perineal membrane.

Pelvic
diaphragm

Levator ani
Coccygeus

Coccyx
Piriformis

Weakness of the pelvic floor muscles
may cause pain; urinary incontinence;
fecal incontinence; and prolapse of
the pelvic organs that can produce a
cystocele, rectocele, or enterocele. Risk
factors are advancing age; prior pelvic
surgery or trauma; parity and childbirth; clinical conditions (obesity, diabetes, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson
disease); medications (anticholinergics, a-adrenergic blockers); and
chronically increased intra-abdominal
pressure from chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD), chronic
constipation, or obesity.1
See Table 14-2, Bulges and Swelling of
the Vulva, Vagina, and Urethra, p. 597.

Anus
Vagina
Urethra
Urogenital diaphragm
Symphysis pubis

FIGURE 14-6.

Pelvic ﬂoor.

■ Brieﬂy, the pelvic diaphragm separates the pelvic cavity from the perineum

and consists of the levator ani and the coccygeal muscles, which attach to the
inner surface of the lesser pelvis.
■ The perineal membrane is a triangular sheet of ﬁbromuscular tissue that con-

tains the bulbocavernosus and ischiocavernosus muscles, the superﬁcial
transverse perineal body, and the external anal sphincter. This membrane
spans the anterior triangle that anchors the urethra, the vagina, and perineal
body to the ischiopubic rami.
568

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY
■ The urethra, vagina, and anorectum pass through the key-like opening in the

center of the pelvic diaphragm, the urogenital (levator) hiatus.
■ Inferior to the pelvic diaphragm is the third supporting structure, the deep

urogenital diaphragm. This diaphragm includes the external urethral sphincter; the urethra; and the supporting deep transverse perineal muscle, which
runs from the inferior ischium to the midline. Note the structures of the
posterior triangle, principally the external anal sphincter muscle that encircles
the rectum and the internal anal sphincter.
■ The pelvic diaphragm is innervated by the sacral nerve roots S3 to S5. The

perineal membrane and the urogenital diaphragm are innervated by the pudendal nerve.

Loss of urethral support contributes
to stress incontinence. Weakness of the
perineal body from childbirth predisposes to rectoceles and enteroceles.

In most women, pubic hair spreads downward in a triangular pattern, pointing
toward the vagina. In 10% of women, it may form an inverted triangle, pointing
toward the umbilicus. This growth is usually not completed until the middle 20s
or later. The growth of pubic hair along with breast development are the main
components of sexual maturity assessment in girls.

See the Tanner stages of sexual maturity in Chapter 18, Assessing Children:
Infancy Through Adolescence,
pp. 897–901.

Just before menarche, there is a physiologic increase in vaginal secretions—a
normal change that sometimes worries a girl or her mother. As menses
become more regular, these increased secretions, or leukorrhea, coincide with
ovulation. They also accompany sexual arousal. These normal discharges
must be differentiated from the discharges of cervical and vaginal infections.

See Table 14-3, Vaginal Discharge,
p. 598, and Table 14-6, Abnormalities
of the Cervix, p. 600.

Lymphatics. Lymph from the vulva and lower vagina drains into the
inguinal nodes. Lymph from the internal genitalia, including the upper vagina,
ﬂows into the pelvic and abdominal lymph nodes, which are not palpable.

The Health History
Common and Concerning Symptoms
Menarche, menstruation, menopause, postmenopausal bleeding
Pregnancy
● Vulvovaginal symptoms
● Sexual health
● Pelvic pain—acute and chronic
● Sexually transmitted infections (STIs)
●
●

Menarche, Menstruation, Menopause. Questions about menarche,
menstruation, and menopause provide an opportunity to explore the patient’s
concerns and her attitude about her body. Learn to describe menstrual patterns,
using the terms on the next page.
C H A P T E R 14

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| Female Genitalia

569

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY

The Menstrual History—Helpful Deﬁnitions
Menarche—age at onset of menses
Dysmenorrhea—pain with menses, often with bearing down, aching, or cramping sensation in the lower abdomen or pelvis
● Premenstrual syndrome (PMS)—a cluster of emotional, behavioral, and
physical symptoms occurring 5 days before menses for three consecutive
cycles
● Amenorrhea—absence of menses
● Abnormal uterine bleeding—bleeding between menses; includes infrequent,
excessive, prolonged, or postmenopausal bleeding
● Menopause—absence of menses for 12 consecutive months, usually occurring
between ages 48 and 55 years
● Postmenopausal bleeding—bleeding occurring 6 months or more after cessation of menses
●
●

Menarche and Menses. When talking with an adolescent girl about
menarche, opening questions might include: “How did you ﬁrst learn about
monthly periods? How did you feel when they started? Many girls worry when
their periods aren’t regular or come late. Has anything like that bothered you?”
Explain that girls in the United States usually begin menstruation between ages
9 and 16 years, and that often it takes ≥1 year for menstrual cycles to settle into
a regular pattern. Age at menarche is variable, depending on genetic endowment,
socioeconomic status, and nutrition. The interval between periods ranges
roughly from 24 to 32 days; ﬂow lasts from 3 to 7 days.

For the menstrual history, ask the patient her age when menses began, or age at
menarche. When did her last menstrual period (LMP) start, and, if possible, the
one before that, called the prior menstrual period (PMP). How often does she have
periods, as measured by the interval between the ﬁrst day of two successive
periods? How regular or irregular are they? How long do they last? How heavy
is the ﬂow? What color is it? Flow can be assessed roughly by the number of pads
or tampons used daily. Because women differ in their deﬁnitions of heavy, moderate, or light ﬂow, ask the patient whether she usually soaks a pad or tampon,
or spots it lightly. Further, does she use a pad and tampon at the same time? Does
she have any bleeding between periods? Or after intercourse?

The dates of previous periods provide
clues to possible pregnancy or menstrual irregularities.

Dysmenorrhea. Dysmenorrhea or pain with menses, is reported by
almost half of women patients. Ask if the patient has any discomfort or pain
before or during her periods. If so, what is it like, how long does it last, and does
it interfere with usual activities? Are there other associated symptoms? Dysmenorrhea may be primary, without an organic cause, or secondary, with an organic
cause.

Primary dysmenorrhea results from
increased prostaglandin production
during the luteal phase of the menstrual cycle, when estrogen and
progesterone levels decline.

Unlike the normal dark red menstrual
discharge, excessive flow tends to be
bright red and may include “clots” (not
true fibrin clots).

Causes of secondary dysmenorrhea
include endometriosis, adenomyosis
(endometriosis in the muscular layers
of the uterus), pelvic inflammatory
disease (PID), and endometrial polyps.

570

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY
Premenstrual Syndrome. PMS includes emotional and behavioral
symptoms such as depression, angry outbursts, irritability, anxiety, confusion,
crying spells, sleep disturbance, poor concentration, and social withdrawal. 3
Ask about signs such as bloating and weight gain, swelling of the hands and
feet, and generalized aches and pains. Criteria for diagnosis are symptoms and
signs in the 5 days prior to menses for at least three consecutive cycles; cessation of symptoms and signs within 4 days after onset of menses; and interference with daily activities.
Amenorrhea. Amenorrhea refers to the absence of periods. Absence of
ever initiating periods is primary amenorrhea; cessation of periods after they have
been established is secondary amenorrhea. Pregnancy, lactation, and menopause
are physiologic causes of secondary amenorrhea.

Other causes of secondary amenorrhea include low body weight from
any condition, including malnutrition
and anorexia nervosa, stress, chronic
illness, and hypothalamic–pituitary–
ovarian dysfunction.

Abnormal Bleeding. Ask about any abnormal bleeding. The term abnormal
uterine bleeding encompasses several patterns.

Causes vary by age group and include
pregnancy, cervical or vaginal infection or cancer, cervical or endometrial
polyps or hyperplasia, fibroids, bleeding disorders, and hormonal contraception or replacement therapy.

Patterns of Abnormal Bleeding
Polymenorrhea, or less than 21-day intervals between menses
Oligomenorrhea, or infrequent bleeding
● Menorrhagia, or excessive ﬂow
● Metrorrhagia, or intermenstrual bleeding
● Postcoital bleeding
●
●

Menopause. Menopause typically occurs between ages 48 and 55 years,
peaking at a median age of 51 years. It is deﬁned retrospectively as cessation of
menses for 12 months, progressing through several stages of erratic cyclical
bleeding. These stages of variable cycle length, often with vasomotor symptoms
like hot ﬂashes, ﬂushing, and sweating, represent perimenopause. The ovaries
stop producing estradiol or progesterone and estrogen levels drop signiﬁcantly,
although some testosterone synthesis persists.4 Pituitary secretion of luteinizing
hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone gradually becomes markedly elevated. Low levels of estradiol remain detectable due to conversion of adrenal
steroids in peripheral adipose tissue. During the menopausal transition, women
may experience mood shifts; changes in self-image; hot ﬂashes from vasomotor
changes; accelerated bone loss; increases in total and low-density lipoprotein
cholesterol; and vulvovaginal atrophy with vaginal drying, dysuria, or dyspareunia. Studies suggest that only vasomotor symptoms, vaginal symptoms, and
trouble sleeping are consistently linked to menopause. Urinary symptoms may
occur in the absence of infection, due to atrophy of the urethra and urinary
trigone.

Postcoital bleeding suggests cervical
polyps or cancer or, in an older
woman, atrophic vaginitis.

Women may ask about alternative
compounds and botanicals for relief of
menopause-related symptoms. Most
are poorly studied and not proven to
be beneficial. Estrogen replacement
relieves symptoms, but poses other
health hazards.5 Relatively few medications have been shown to affect
symptoms (see p. 582).

C H A P T E R 14

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| Female Genitalia

571

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
THE HEALTH HISTORY

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Ask a middle-aged or older woman if she has stopped menstruating. When?
Continue with “How do (did) you feel about not having your periods anymore?”
“Has this affected your life in either a positive or negative way?” Did any symptoms accompany her transition to menopause? Always be sure to ask about any
bleeding or spotting after menopause as this may be an early sign of cancer.

Causes of postmenopausal bleeding
include endometrial cancer, hormone
replacement therapy (HRT), and uterine
and cervical polyps.

Pregnancy. The health history includes such questions as, “Have you ever
been pregnant? How many times?…How many living children do you have?…
Have you ever had a miscarriage or an abortion? How many times?” Ask about
any difﬁculties during pregnancy and the timing and circumstances of any
abortion, whether spontaneous or induced. How did the woman experience
these losses? Obstetricians commonly record the pregnancy history using the
“gravida para” system.

See Chapter 19, The Pregnant Woman,
pp. 927–954 for further discussion.

The Gravida Para Notation
●
●

G = gravida, or total number of pregnancies
P = para, or outcomes of pregnancies. After P, you will often see the notations
F (full-term), P (premature), A (abortion), and L (living child).

Inquire about methods of contraception used by the patient and her partner. Is
the patient satisﬁed with the method chosen? Are there any questions about the
options available?
If amenorrhea suggests a current pregnancy, inquire about the date of last intercourse and common early symptoms: tenderness, tingling, or increased size of the
breasts; urinary frequency; nausea and vomiting; easy fatigability; and sensations
that the baby is moving, usually present at about 20 weeks. Be sensitive to the
patient’s feelings about these topics; explore them when the patient has special
concerns. (See also Chapter 19, The Pregnant Woman, p. 927.)

Amenorrhea followed by heavy
bleeding suggests a threatened abortion or dysfunctional uterine bleeding
related to lack of ovulation.

Vulvovaginal Symptoms. The most common vulvovaginal symptoms
are vaginal discharge and itching. If the patient reports a discharge, inquire about
its amount, color, consistency, and odor. Ask about any local sores or lumps in the
vulvar area. Are they painful? Because patients vary in their understanding of
anatomical terms, be prepared to try alternative phrasing such as “Any itching
(or other symptoms) near your vagina?. . . between your legs?. . . where you
urinate?”

See Table 14-1, Lesions of the Vulva,
p. 596; and Table 14-3, Vaginal
Discharge, p. 598.

Sexual Health. Sexual health plays an important and natural role in overall
well-being, yet many clinicians feel ill-equipped to address sexual health issues.6,7
Patients immediately sense your receptiveness to their concerns in this sensitive
and vital area. Maintaining a neutral, nonjudgmental tone helps your patients
feel safe and trust you with their concerns. Many patients have strong beliefs
about sexual behavior related to their upbringing, faith, ethnicity, educational
level, and past experiences. Reassure them that sex in a mature consensual
relationship is healthy, and that you explore sexual health with all your patients.
Be aware of your own body language, facial expressions, and tone of voice, so
that you create an open environment for discussion. In younger patients and
572

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY
adolescents, consider asking the parents to leave the room so that the patients
feel free to answer questions without fear of parental disapproval or repercussions,
especially when discussing possible sexual abuse.
Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity. Recent surveys indicate 1.6%
to 3.4% of Americans’ self-identify as lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender
(LGBT).8–10 Many are apprehensive about health care encounters, and clinicians
are generally underprepared for providing LGBT care. Both the Institute of Medicine (2011) and the American College of Physicians (2015) have called for
policies to reduce signiﬁcant disparities in LGBT health care, including increased
risk of suicide, depression, and STIs.11,12 Listen closely to your patients and
probe existing resources to learn about LGBT health issues.13–15 As you talk with
patients, begin with neutral questions about sexual orientation and gender identity,
listed below.16

See also The Sexual History, Chapter 3,
pp. 94–95; and Tips for Taking a Sexual
History and the discussion of gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender health
care in Chapter 13, Male Genitalia and
Hernias, pp. 545–546.

■ “Are you currently dating, sexually active, or in a relationship?” “How would

you identify your sexual orientation?” The range of responses includes heterosexual or straight, lesbian, gay, women who have sex with women, men
who have sex with men (MSM), bisexual, transsexual, and questioning,
among others.
■ “How would you describe your gender identity?” Responses include male,

female, transsexual, transgendered, intersex, female-to-male, male-tofemale, unsure or questioning, and even “prefer not to answer.”
■ Continue with, “Do you use protection such as birth control or condoms?…

Has anyone ever tried to touch or have sex with you without your consent?”
Sexual Response. Start with general questions such as “How is sex for
you?” or “Are you having any problems with sex? This includes sexual intercourse and anal and oral sex.” Alternatively, you can ask, “Are you satisﬁed with
your sex life as it is now? Has there been any signiﬁcant change in the last few
years? Are you satisﬁed with your ability to perform sexually? How does your
partner feel?” Studies show that patients are often uncomfortable bringing up
these topics. Many prefer to have them initiated by their providers, and most
welcome information about sexual health.17–19

If the patient has concerns about her response to sex, consider direct questions
to help you assess each phase of the sexual response: desire, arousal, and orgasm.
“Do you have an interest in (appetite for) sex?” inquires about desire, or libido. If
indicated, follow up with, “Has your interest in sex increased or decreased? . . . Can
you describe why you think it has changed? Are you and your partners having
any difﬁculties or problems, or any new stress?” Often, stressors like relationship
changes, job changes, or even moving affect sexual drive and enjoyment. For
arousal, ask, “Do you get sexually aroused? Do you lubricate easily (get wet or
slippery)? Do you stay too dry?” Continue with, “Do you use lubricants to help
with dryness?” For orgasm, ask, “Are you able to reach climax (have an orgasm,
or ‘come’)?” “Is it important for you to reach climax?” “Do you enjoy sex if you
do not reach orgasm?”

Sexual dysfunction is classified by the
phase of sexual response. A woman
may lack desire; she may fail to
become aroused and attain adequate
vaginal lubrication; or, despite adequate arousal, she may be unable to
reach orgasm. Causes include lack of
estrogen, clinical illness, trauma or
abuse, surgery, pelvic anatomy,
and psychological and psychiatric
conditions.

C H A P T E R 14

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| Female Genitalia

573

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
THE HEALTH HISTORY

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Ask also about dyspareunia, or pain with intercourse. If present, try to localize
where the pain occurs. Is it near the outside, at the start of intercourse, or does
she feel it farther in, when her partner is pushing deeper? Vaginismus refers to an
involuntary spasm of the muscles surrounding the vaginal oriﬁce that makes
penetration during intercourse painful or impossible.

Superficial pain suggests local inflammation, atrophic vaginitis, or inadequate lubrication; deeper pain may
arise from pelvic disorders or pressure
on a normal ovary. Causes of vaginismus may be physical or psychological.

In addition to identifying and understanding sexual problems, ask about onset,
severity (persistent or sporadic), setting, and factors, if any, that make them better or worse. What does the patient think is the source of the problem, what has
she tried to do about it, and what does she hope for? The causes of sexual dysfunction are complex and include the patient’s general health; medications and
drugs, including use of alcohol; knowledge of sexual practices and techniques;
her attitudes, values, and fears; the relationship and communication between
partners; and the setting in which sexual activity takes place.

Commonly, sexual problems are
related to situational and psychosocial
factors.

Pelvic Pain—Acute and Chronic. Many women volunteer a history of
pelvic pain. Acute pelvic pain in menstruating girls and women warrants
immediate attention. The differential diagnosis is broad but includes lifethreatening conditions such as ectopic pregnancy, ovarian torsion, and appendicitis.
As you identify onset, timing, features of the pain, and associated symptoms, you
will need to consider infectious, gastrointestinal (GI), and urinary causes. Be sure to
ask about STIs, recent insertion of an intrauterine device (IUD), and any symptoms
in the sexual partner. A careful pelvic examination, with attention to vital signs, and
testing for pregnancy will help narrow your diagnosis and guide further testing.

The most common cause of acute pelvic pain is PID, followed by ruptured
ovarian cyst, and appendicitis.20 STIs
and recent IUD insertion are red flags
for PID. Always rule out ectopic pregnancy first with serum or urine testing
and possible ultrasound.21,22

Chronic pelvic pain refers to pain that lasts for more than 6 months and does not
respond to treatment.23 It accounts for approximately 10% of ambulatory referrals
to gynecologists and 20% of hysterectomies.24,25 Risk factors are advancing age,
prior pelvic surgery or trauma, parity and childbirth, clinical conditions (obesity,
diabetes, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson disease), medications (anticholinergics,
α-adrenergic blockers), and chronically increased intra-abdominal pressure
(COPD, chronic constipation, obesity).1 Explore gynecologic, urologic, GI, musculoskeletal, and neurological causes.24 The Pelvic Pain Assessment Form of the
International Pelvic Pain Society, which includes screening questions for depression and physical and sexual abuse, as well as a pain map that women complete,
is a helpful resource.26 Asking the woman to keep a daily pain journal, noting any
changes in situational, dietary, or seasonal conditions, may also be useful.

Endometriosis, from retrograde menstrual flow and extension of the uterine
lining outside the uterus, affects 50% to
60% of women and girls with pelvic
pain.27 Other causes include PID and
adenosis and fibroids, which are tumors
in the uterine wall or submucosal or subserosal surfaces arising from the smooth
muscle cells of the myometrium.

Also consider mittelschmerz, which is
typically a mild unilateral pain lasting
for a few hours to a few days arising at
midcycle from ovulation, ruptured
ovarian cyst, and tubo-ovarian abscess.

Chronic pelvic pain is a red flag for a
history of sexual abuse. Also consider
pelvic floor spasm from myofascial pain
with trigger points on examination
(see pp. 592–593).

Sexually Transmitted Infections. Local symptoms or ﬁndings on
physical examination may raise the possibility of STIs (also referred to as sexually
transmitted diseases [STDs]). After establishing the seven attributes of any
symptoms, elicit the patient’s sexual history. Inquire about sexual contacts and
establish the number of sexual partners in the past 3 to 6 months. Ask if the
patient has concerns about human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) infection,
574

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
desires HIV testing, or has current or past partners at risk. Also ask about oral
and anal sex and, if indicated, about symptoms involving the mouth, throat,
anus, and rectum. Review the past history of STIs. “Have you ever had herpes?…
any other problems such as gonorrhea?…syphilis?…pelvic infections?” Continue
with the more general questions suggested on pp. 94–95.

Health Promotion and
Counseling: Evidence and
Recommendations
Important Topics for Health Promotion
and Counseling
Cervical cancer screening
Ovarian cancer: risk factors and screening
● Sexually transmitted infections
● Options for family planning
● Menopause and hormone replacement therapy
●
●

Cervical Cancer Screening: The Pap Smear and Human Papillomavirus Infection. Widespread screening with the Papanicolaou (Pap) smear
has contributed to a signiﬁcant decline in cervical cancer incidence and mortality.
In 2014, an estimated 12,900 women were diagnosed with cervical cancer, with
4,100 deaths.28 The current estimated incidence rate is 7.8 cases per 100,000
women per year. Most cases of cervical cancer occur in women who have not had
appropriate screening.

HPV infection with high-risk oncogenic subtypes is found in virtually all cervical
cancers.29 Roughly 90% of HPV infections are asymptomatic and resolve within
2 years. The most important risk factor for cervical cancer is persistent infection with
high-risk HPV subtypes, especially HPV 16 or HPV 18. These two subtypes cause
roughly 70% of cervical cancers worldwide. Even the 10% of women with persistent
infection rarely progress to cervical cancer if they undergo regular screening, insofar
as the average estimated time for a high-grade HPV lesion to progress to cervical cancer is 10 years, allowing a long interval for detection and treatment.28 Genital infection
with low-risk subtypes, such as HPV 6 and HPV 11, is associated with genital warts.
Two notable risk factors for cervical cancer include failure to undergo screening, which accounts for roughly half of women diagnosed with cervical cancer,
and multiple sexual partners. Other risk factors include smoking, immunosuppression from any cause including HIV infection, long-term use of oral contraception, coinfection with Chlamydia trachomatis, parity, prior cervical cancer, and
genetic polymorphisms affecting the entry of HPV DNA into cervical cells.30
Cervical Cancer Screening Guidelines, 2015. For the ﬁrst time, in
2012, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), the American College of
C H A P T E R 14

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| Female Genitalia

575

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), and the American Cancer Society (ACS),
in collaboration with the American Society for Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology
(ASCCP) and the American Society for Clinical Pathology (ASCP), released guidelines that agree on cervical cancer screening for average-risk women, summarized
below, which contain the important deﬁnition of average risk.28,30–32 Note that in
2014, the American College of Physicians found no evidence supporting screening
with routine pelvic examinations alone in average-risk, asymptomatic adult women
(as distinct from cervical cancer screening or symptom-based examination).33,34
Current Cervical Cancer Screening Guidelines
for Average-Risk Women: USPSTF, ACS/ASCCP/
ASCP, and ACOG
Variablea

Recommendation

Age at which to begin screening
Screening method and interval

21 yrs
Ages 21–65 yrs: cytology every 3 yrs OR
Ages 21–29 yrs: cytology every 3 yrs
Ages 30–65 yrs: cytology plus HPV testing
(for high-risk or oncogenic HPV types)
every 5 yrs
Age >65 yrs, assuming three consecutive
negative results on cytology or two consecutive negative results on cytology
plus HPV testing within 10 yrs before
cessation of screening, with the most
recent test performed within 5 yrs
Not recommended

Age at which to end screening

Screening after hysterectomy
with removal of the cervix
HPV, human papillomavirus.

a
Deﬁnition of Average Risk: No history of high-grade, precancerous cervical lesion (cervical intraepithelial neoplasia grade 2 or a more severe lesion) or cervical cancer; not immunocompromised
(including being HIV-infected); and no in utero exposure to diethylstilbestrol.

Source: Sawaya GF, Kulasingam S, Denberg T, et al. Cervical cancer screening in average-risk women:
Best practice advice from the Clinical Guidelines Committee of the American College of Physicians.
Ann Intern Med 2015;162:851.

Rationale for Screening Recommendations. All three sets of guidelines concur that screening should begin at age 21 years, and that there is no
need for annual screening for average-risk women at any age.
■ Women age <21 years: Although cytologic abnormalities on Pap smear are

common, most HPV infections clear spontaneously within 1 to 2 years. Pap
smears in this age group have often led to unnecessary procedures that could
affect cervical competency, pregnancy, and childbirth.
■ Women ages 21 to 65 years: All three guidelines, including a grade A recom-

mendation from the USPSTF, recommend Pap smear cytology every 3 years
or, alternatively, cotesting with cytology plus HPV testing for high-risk subtypes every 5 years. Women with normal cytology but negative high-risk
576

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

HPV testing have an estimated risk of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN)
grade 2 or higher at 5 years of only 0.34%.28 The guidelines agree that testing
for HPV alone or cotesting should only begin after age 30 years, because the
prevalence of self-limited HPV in women age <30 years is still high.
■ Women age ≥65 years: All concur that screening can stop if women have had

three consecutive negative results on cytology or two consecutive negative
results with cotesting within 10 years of cessation of screening (with the
most recent test performed within 5 years), as the risk of cervical cancer is
low, and risk factors decrease with age.
■ Women with hysterectomy: Average-risk women with a hysterectomy and re-

moval of the cervix and no history of high-grade precancer or cervical cancer
do not need screening. Screening guidelines for women with a subtotal
(supracervical) hysterectomy are the same as for average risk women.35
Note that to follow these guidelines, women and clinicians need to have an accurate history of past Pap smear testing and results.
Take the time to understand how Pap smear results are reported. Current classiﬁcation and management guidelines are based on the Bethesda System of the
National Cancer Institute (NCI), revised in 2001.36,37 The principal categories
are provided below. Management depends on the cervical cancer risk and often
involves repeat cytology, colposcopy, and DNA testing for HPV.
Classiﬁcation of Pap Smear Cytology:
The Bethesda System (2001)

Conventional Pap smears have a sensitivity and specificity for detecting cervical cancer of 30% to 87% and 86% to
100%, respectively. For liquid-based
cytology, these figures are 61% to 95%
and 78% to 82%. The sensitivity of Pap
smear and HPV DNA testing is 74.6%
to 100%.38–40

Negative for intraepithelial lesion or malignancy: No cellular evidence of neoplasia
is present, although other organisms like Trichomonas, Candida, or Actinomyces
may be reported in this category. Shifts in ﬂora consistent with bacterial vaginosis or cellular changes from herpes simplex may also be reported.
● Epithelial cell abnormalities: These include precancerous and cancerous lesions
such as:
● Squamous cells, including atypical squamous cells (ASC ), which may be of
undetermined signiﬁcance (ASC-US); low-grade squamous intraepithelial
lesions (LSIL), including mild dysplasia; high-grade squamous intraepithelial
lesions (HSIL), including moderate and severe dysplasia with features suspicious for invasion; and invasive squamous cell carcinoma.
● Glandular cells, including atypical endocervical cells or atypical endometrial
cells, speciﬁed or not otherwise speciﬁed (NOS); atypical endocervical cells
or atypical glandular cells, favor neoplasia; endocervical adenocarcinoma in
situ; and adenocarcinoma.
● Other malignant neoplasms, such as sarcomas or lymphomas, are rare.
●

The HPV Vaccine
■ Routine vaccination for girls ages 11 and 12: The Advisory Committee on Immu-

nization Practices of the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) and the American Academy of Pediatrics recommend a three-dose vaccination series over 6
months with either the quadrivalent or bivalent vaccine for girls and boys at
C H A P T E R 14

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| Female Genitalia

577

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
ages 11 or 12, before their ﬁrst sexual encounter; the series can begin as early
as age 9 years.41,42 The quadrivalent vaccine prevents infection from HPV subtypes 16 and 18, as well as 6 and 11, which cause 90% of genital warts. The
bivalent vaccine prevents infection from subtypes 16 and 18. Vaccination with
the quadrivalent HPV vaccine is also recommended for the prevention of cervical, vulvar, and vaginal cancers and precancers in females, as well as anal cancers and precancers and genital warts in both females and males.

Starting HPV vaccination early is important. In American adolescents, the
prevalence of sexual intercourse in 2013 was 5.6% before age 13 years; 30%
by ninth grade, and 64% by the end of high school.43 Vaccinated women
should still get cervical cancer screening because the vaccines do not prevent
all HPV subtypes. Also, consistent use of condoms does not eliminate the
risk of cervical HPV infection.44,45
■ Catch-up vaccination: is recommended for females ages 13 through 26 years

who have not had prior vaccination or completed the three-dose series. If
females reach age 27 years before completing the series, the second and/or
third vaccine doses can be administered after age 26 years to complete the
series. Prevaccination assessments to establish the need for Pap or high-risk
HPV DNA testing are not recommended.
■ The HPV vaccine is recommended for persons with compromised immune

systems, including infection with HIV, through age 26 years if they have not
been fully vaccinated when younger.
Ovarian Cancer: Risk Factors and Screening. Many women are fearful
of ovarian cancer. Although ovarian cancer is relatively rare, it is the ﬁfth leading
cause of cancer-related death for women.46 Two thirds of women affected are older
than age 55 years; most are diagnosed when the disease is already metastatic to the
peritoneal cavity or other organs. Overall 5-year survival is only 40%,47 compared to
94% for the 15% of women who present with local early-stage disease. Currently,
there are no effective screening tests, so clinicians face the challenge of improving
identiﬁcation of symptoms. In women older than age 50 years, three symptoms
merit special attention: abdominal distention, abdominal bloating, and urinary
frequency; however, these are usually reported within 3 months of diagnosis
and frequently occur in other conditions. The USPSTF reviewed current evidence
in 2012 and continued to recommend against screening for ovarian cancer, a grade
D recommendation based on ﬁndings that there is moderate or high certainty that
screening has no net beneﬁt, or that the harms outweigh the beneﬁts.46

Risk factors for ovarian cancer include family history and presence of the
BRCA1 or BRCA2 gene mutation. Risk is tripled if there is a ﬁrst-degree relative
with breast or ovarian cancer. Carriers of BRCA1 and BRCA2 have a lifetime risk
of 40% to 50% and 20% to 30%, respectively.48 Other risk factors include obesity
and nulliparity, with growing evidence of increased risk from use of postmenopausal
HRT, especially long-time users and users of sequential estrogen–progesterone
schedules.49,50 More than 90% of ovarian cancers appear to be random. Risk is
decreased by use of oral contraceptives, multiple pregnancies, breastfeeding, and
tubal ligation. Recent investigations show that in high-risk women (BRCA positive;
positive family history), some ovarian cancer cells may arise in the fallopian tubes,
creating the option of risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy.51
578

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Women frequently ask about CA-125 testing. The CA-125 level is neither sensitive
nor speciﬁc. Recent studies are investigating additional biomarkers and stratiﬁcation
of CA-125 cutoff points for demographic and clinical subgroups to reduce the high
false-positive rate.47,52 Although CA-125 is elevated in more than 80% of women
with ovarian cancer and helps predict relapse after treatment, it is also elevated in
many other conditions and cancers, including pregnancy; endometriosis; uterine
ﬁbroids; PID; benign cysts; and pancreatic, breast, lung, gastric, and colon cancer.
Current investigations of combined screening with CA-125, transvaginal ultrasound,
and selected tumor markers have not demonstrated beneﬁts that improve survival.
Sexually Transmitted Infections. U.S. rates of STIs are the highest in
the industrialized world. Chlamydia trachomatis is the most commonly reported
STI in the United States and the most common STI in women, with an estimated
2.8 million cases annually (although HPV is more prevalent and the most common
STI).53 Often, symptoms are subtle and the infection remains undiagnosed. If
untreated, 10% to 15% of women will develop PID, a polymicrobial infection
with an 8% to 40% risk of tubal infertility depending on the number of episodes;
a third to a half of cases are attributed to coinfection of C. trachomatis with Neisseria
gonorrhoeae.54,55 Chlamydia infection rates are highest in women ages 20 to
24 years, closely followed by women ages 15 to 19 years. African American
women and American Indian/Alaskan natives are at highest risk for infection. As
with other STIs, risk factors are age younger than 24 years and sexually active;
prior infection with chlamydia or other STIs, new or multiple partners, inconsistent
condom use, and occupational sex work. Detection, groups most affected, and
consequences of underdiagnosis and treatment are similar for gonorrhea. Infection
with syphilis is less common, but increasing in men.56

Chlamydial infection is a cause of urethritis, cervicitis, PID, ectopic pregnancy, infertility, and chronic pelvic
pain. Risk factors include age younger
than 26 years, multiple partners, and
prior history of STIs.

To improve detection and treatment, the CDC and the USPSTF57 strongly recommend screening for STIs, summarized below.
CDC STI and HIV Screening
Recommendations 2014
Chlamydia and gonorrhea screening annually for all sexually active women
ages <25 years and older women with risk factors such as new or multiple sex
partners, or a sex partner infected with an STI.
● Chlamydia, syphilis, hepatitis B, and HIV screening for all pregnant women and
gonorrhea screening for at-risk pregnant women starting early in pregnancy,
with repeat testing as needed to protect the health of mothers and their infants.
● Chlamydia, gonorrhea, and syphilis screening at least once a year for all sexually
active gay, bisexual, and other MSM. MSM who have multiple or anonymous partners should be screened more frequently for STIs (i.e., at 3- to 6-month intervals).
● HIV testing at least once for all adults and adolescents from ages 13 to 64 years.
● HIV testing at least once a year for anyone having unsafe sex or using injection drug equipment. Sexually active gay and bisexual men may beneﬁt from
testing every 3 to 6 months.
●

Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted diseases. STD and HIV
screening recommendations. Updated December 16, 2014. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/std/
prevention/screeningreccs.htm. Accessed May 20, 2015.

C H A P T E R 14

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| Female Genitalia

579

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

HIV Infection. More than 1.2 million Americans are infected with HIV,
and one in seven (14%) is unaware of their infection.58 The number of infected
individuals continues to increase, although the number of new infections has
remained stable. In 2013, an estimated 47,352 people were diagnosed with HIV
infection and an estimated 26,688 people were diagnosed with acquired immune
deﬁciency syndrome (AIDS), bringing the estimated total number of Americans
diagnosed with AIDS to 1,194,039. At highest risk, are gay, bisexual, and other
MSM of all ethnicities, but especially, young black/African American MSM ages
13 to 24 years. In 2010, MSM represented 4% of the United States male population and 63% of all new infections. White MSM had the largest total number of
new infections. Blacks/African Americans and Hispanics/Latinos remain disproportionately affected.

In the United States, 20% of new infections occur in women, primarily
through heterosexual contact (84% in 2010) and injection drug use (14%).
Women represent 23% of those living with HIV infection. Among infected
women, 64% are African American, 18% are white, and 15% are Hispanic/
Latinos. The CDC reports that women are not accessing health care and are
undertreated: “in 2011, only 45% were engaged in care, and only 32% had
achieved viral suppression.”59 Heterosexual transmission is more likely in the
following settings: vaginal or anal intercourse without a condom, sex
exchanged for drugs, sex with multiple partners, infection with other STIs,
women who have been sexually abused, sex with an infected partner with a
high viral load of HIV-1, cervical ectopy, sex during menstruation, and sex
with a male partner without circumcision. Recurrent vulvocandidiasis, concurrent STIs, abnormal Pap smears (occurring in 40% of HIV-positive women),
and HPV infection are warning indications for HIV testing. As shown above,
the CDC recommends universal HIV testing for everyone in the age range of
13 to 64 years due to the prevalence of infections in people without known
risk factors and underreporting.
Clinician Counseling for Prevention of STIs and HIV. The USPSTF
recommends intensive behavioral counseling for all sexually active adolescents
and for adults who are at increased risk for STIs, a grade B recommendation.60
High-intensity counseling with more than 2 hours of intervention contact is the
most successful, although this may be challenging for primary care ofﬁces compared to integrated practice settings.61 The USPSTF evidence review notes that
successful counseling includes: “prevalence, transmission, and details on how to
reduce the risk for transmission; help in identifying personal risk for STIs; training in common behavior change processes, such as problem solving, decision
making, and goal-setting; training in communication surrounding condom use
and safe sex; and hands-on practice with condoms. Many successful interventions were also speciﬁcally tailored to the gender and race/ethnicity of the
participants.”

Key to effective clinician counseling are respect, compassion, a nonjudgmental
attitude, and use of open-ended and understandable questions, such as, “Tell me
about any new sex partners” and “Have you ever had anal sex, meaning ‘penis in
rectum/anus sex’?” The CDC recommends interactive client-centered counseling, tailored to the person’s speciﬁc risk factors and situation.62
580

See Chapter 3, Interviewing and the
Health History, pp. 94–95, on eliciting
the sexual history, and Chapter 13,
Male Genitalia and Hernias, pp. 548–
549, on risk factors for HIV infection.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Training in prevention counseling improves effectiveness. Consult the excellent
websites recommended by the CDC such as:
■ Effective interventions. HIV prevention that works—at http://effectiveinter

ventions.org
■ Project Respect—at http://depts.washington.edu/nnptc/

Options for Family Planning. The CDC notes that “Teen pregnancy has
declined to the lowest rates in seven decades, yet still ranks highest among the
developed countries.”63 Signiﬁcant health disparities remain: In 2013, nonHispanic black, Hispanic, and American Indian/Alaska Native teen birth rates
were still one and a half to two times higher than the rate for non-Hispanic white
teens. Almost half of U.S. pregnancies are unintended. Among pregnancies in
teens ages 15 to 19 years and younger than age 15 years, the percentage of
unintended pregnancy climbs to over 80% and 98%, respectively. It is important
to counsel girls and women about the timing of ovulation in the menstrual cycle
and how to plan or prevent pregnancy. Be familiar with the numerous options
for contraception and their effectiveness listed below.64

Types of Family Planning Methods
Methods

Types of Contraception

Natural

Fertility awareness/periodic abstinence, withdrawal, lactation
Male condom, female condom, diaphragm, cervical cap, sponge
IUD, subdermal implant of levonorgestrel
Spermicide, oral contraceptives (estrogen and progesterone; progestin only), estrogen/progesterone injectables and patch, hormonal vaginal
contraceptive ring, emergency contraception
Tubal ligation; transcervical sterilization; vasectomy

Barrier
Implantable
Pharmacologic/hormonal

Surgery (permanent)

Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Reproductive health. Contraception. Updated
April 22, 2015. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/UnintendedPregnancy/Contraception.htm. Accessed May 21, 2015.

Failure rates are lowest for the subdermal implant, IUD, female sterilization, and
vasectomy at less than 0.8% per year (<1 pregnancy/100 women/yr) and highest
for male and female condoms, withdrawal, sponge in parous women, fertility
awareness methods, and spermicides at more than 18% per year (or ≥18 pregnancies/100 women/yr). Failure rates for injectables, oral contraceptives, the
patch, vaginal ring, and diaphragm range from 6% to 12% per year (or 6 to 12
pregnancies/100 women/yr).
Take the time to understand the patient or couple’s concerns and preferences, and
respect these preferences whenever possible. Continued use of a preferred method
is superior to a more effective method that is abandoned. For teenagers, a conﬁdential setting eases discussion of topics that may seem private and difﬁcult to explore.
C H A P T E R 14

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| Female Genitalia

581

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Menopause and Hormone Replacement Therapy. For many
women, menopause is a profound transition that brings psychological and
physiologic changes ranging from mood shifts to hot ﬂashes to vaginal drying
and bone loss. Be well informed about the risks and beneﬁts of HRT with estrogen
and progesterone, a topic women ask about frequently. Following publication
of the Women’s Health Initiative trials investigating use of postmenopausal
estrogen plus progesterone in 2002 and estrogen alone in 2004, 65,66 the
USPSTF, ACOG, the American Heart Association, and the North American
Menopause Society (NAMS), among others, issued recommendations against
using HRT for chronic conditions in postmenopausal women. In 2012, the
USPSTF reafﬁrmed its recommendation against the use of combined estrogen
and progestin for the primary prevention of chronic clinical conditions in
postmenopausal women, including women with hysterectomies, citing grade
D evidence that “there is moderate or high certainty that the service has no net
beneﬁt or that the harms outweigh the beneﬁts.”67,68 In its 2012 evidence
review of nine randomized controlled trials from 2002 to 2012, the USPSTF
concluded that “estrogen plus progestin and estrogen alone decreased risk for
fractures but increased risk for stroke, thromboembolic events, gallbladder
disease, and urinary incontinence. Estrogen plus progestin increased risk for
breast cancer and probable dementia, whereas estrogen alone decreased risk
for breast cancer.” The American Heart Association, ACOG, and NAMS
recommend against the use of postmenopausal hormone therapy for primary
or secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease.69–71 ACOG notes that there
is some evidence that transdermal estrogen therapy may have thrombosissparing properties and also ﬁnds insufﬁcient evidence for recent claims that
compounded bioidentical hormones are superior to conventional menopausal
HRT. The USPSTF, ACOG, and NAMS advise that use of HRT for menopausal
vasomotor symptoms be individualized, low dose, and for the shortest
acceptable duration, usually in the range of 1 to 2 years.

Website Resources for Clinicians and Patients
The websites below provide updated information on health promotion and counseling for cervical and ovarian cancer, STIs and HIV, options for family planning, and
menopause. More speciﬁc references are listed in the References on pp. 604–606.
● American Cancer Society—cervical and ovarian cancer at http://www.cancer.org/
● American College of Physicians—clinical practice guidelines at https://www
.acponline.org/clinical_information/guidelines/
● American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists—clinical guidelines at
http://www.acog.org/About-ACOG/ACOG-Departments/Deliveries-Before39-Weeks/ACOG-Clinical-Guidelines
● Centers for Disease Control and Prevention—STIs and HIV at http://www
.cdc.gov/std/
● National Cancer Institute—cervical and ovarian cancer at http://www.cancer.gov/
● North American Menopause Society—for professionals at http://www
.menopause.org/for-professionals
● U.S. Preventive Services Task Force—recommendations for primary care practice
at http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Name/recommendations

582

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Techniques of Examination
Important Areas of Examination
External Examination

Internal Examination

Mons pubis
Labia majora and minora
Urethral meatus, clitoris
Vaginal introitus
Perineum

Vagina, vaginal walls
Cervix
Uterus, ovaries
Pelvic muscles
Rectovaginal wall

Approach to the Pelvic Examination. Many students feel uneasy
during their ﬁrst pelvic examinations. This is normal. At the same time, patients
have their own concerns. Some women have had painful, embarrassing, or even
demeaning experiences during previous pelvic examinations; others may be
facing a pelvic examination for the ﬁrst time. Some women fear what the clinician
may ﬁnd, and how ﬁndings may affect their lives. Asking the patient’s permission
to perform the examination shows courtesy, respect, and the expectation that the
examination is collaborative. Explaining the steps of what you are about to do
will also be greatly appreciated. If a Pap smear is to be collected using the glassslide technique, time the examination so that it does not occur during menses,
because blood can interfere with interpretation.

In liquid-based cytology, blood cells
can be filtered out.

Take steps to help a woman having her ﬁrst pelvic examination know what to
expect. Use three-dimensional models, show her the equipment, let her handle
the speculum, and explain each step both in advance and during the examination to help her learn about her body and feel comfortable. A careful, gentle
technique is especially important for minimizing any pain or discomfort.
The woman’s response to the pelvic examination may reveal clues about her feelings about the examination and her sexuality. If she pulls away, adducts her
thighs, or reacts negatively to the examination, you can gently comment, “I
notice you are having some trouble relaxing. Is it just being here, or are you
troubled by the examination?…Is anything worrying you?” Behaviors that seem
to present an obstacle may lead you to a better understanding of your patient’s
concerns. Adverse reactions may signal prior physical or sexual abuse and should
be explored.72
Pelvic examinations during adolescence should respond to indications such as
menstrual abnormalities (amenorrhea, excessive bleeding, or dysmenorrhea);
unexplained abdominal pain; vaginal discharge; the prescription of contraceptives; bacteriologic and cytologic studies in a sexually active girl; and the patient’s
request for assessment.

See Chapter 18, Assessing Children:
Infancy Through Adolescence,
pp. 900–901.

C H A P T E R 14

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| Female Genitalia

583

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

Tips for the Successful Pelvic Examination
The Patient

The Examiner

Avoids intercourse, douching, or use
of vaginal suppositories for 24 to
48 hrs before examination
Empties her bladder before the examination
Lies supine, with head and shoulders
elevated, arms at her sides or folded
across the chest to enhance eye
contact and reduce tightening of
abdominal muscles

Obtains permission; selects chaperone
Explains each step of the examination
in advance
Drapes the patient from midabdomen to
knees; depresses the drape between
the knees to provide eye contact with
patient
Avoids unexpected or sudden movements
Chooses a speculum that is the correct
size
Warms the speculum with tap water
Monitors the comfort of the examination by watching the patient’s face
Uses excellent but gentle technique,
especially when inserting the
speculum (see pp. 587–588)

Helping the patient to relax is essential for an adequate examination. Adopting
the tips recommended helps enhance the patient’s comfort. Always wear gloves,
both during the examination and when handling equipment and specimens.
Plan ahead, so that any needed equipment and culture media are readily at hand.
Male examiners should be accompanied by female chaperones. Female examiners should also be assisted if the patient is physically or emotionally disturbed,
or if help is needed with the examination.
Sexual Assault. Cases of sexual assault merit special evaluation. Sexual
assault includes rape, unwanted genital touching, and forced exposure to
pornography. Rape is a legal term; in the United States, rape refers to “any
penetration of a body oriﬁce (mouth, vagina, or anus) involving force or the
threat of force or incapacity (i.e., associated with young or old age, cognitive or
physical disability, or drug or alcohol intoxication) and nonconsent.”73 The
lifetime prevalence of sexual assault ranges from 13% to 39% among women and
3% among men. The National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence Survey
report of 2011 revealed that 19.3% of women and 1.7% of men have been raped
during their lifetimes.74 Only two thirds of rape victims report the assault to their
primary care provider, only 20% to 40% present for clinical evaluation, and less
than 40% report rape to law enforcement. Optimally, rape victims should
receive care from a trained team at a rape crisis center or emergency room that
can provide support, treatment of injuries, and documentation of evidence.
Trauma may be extensive, and the time limit for evidence collection is usually 72
to 120 hours. Evidence collection requires patient permission at each step and
involves multistep protocols that can take up to 6 hours to perform. Emotional
support and prevention of STIs and pregnancy should be addressed.
584

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Seek supervision and consultation as you learn the complex psychological,
clinical, and legal dimensions of caring for these patients, and review guidelines
and recommendations from the World Health Organization, ACOG, and the
CDC.75–77
Choosing Equipment. Assemble the equipment below, and review the
supplies and procedures of your own facility before taking cultures and other
samples. You will need:
■ A movable source of good light
■ A vaginal speculum of appropriate size
■ Water-soluble lubricant
■ Equipment for taking Pap smears, bacteriologic cultures and DNA probes,

or other diagnostic testing materials, such as potassium hydroxide and normal saline
Specula are either metal or plastic and come in two basic shapes, named for
Pedersen and Graves (Fig. 14-7). Both are available in small, medium, and large
sizes. The medium Pedersen speculum is usually most comfortable for
sexually active women. The narrowbladed Pedersen speculum is best for
the patient with a small introitus, such
as a virgin or an elderly woman. The
Graves specula are best for parous
women with vaginal prolapse.
Before using a speculum, practice
opening and closing its blades, locking the blades in an open position,
and releasing them again. The instructions in this chapter apply to a metal
speculum; you can easily adapt them
to a plastic speculum by handling it
before use.

When using a plastic speculum, warn
the patient that it typically makes a
loud click and may pinch when locked
or released, causing discomfort.
Positioning the Patient. Drape
the patient appropriately and then assist
her into the lithotomy position. Place
one heel, then the other into the
stirrups. She may be more comfortable
in socks or shoes than bare feet. Then

F I G U R E 1 4 - 7 . Specula, from left to right: small metal Pedersen, medium metal
Pedersen, medium metal Graves, large metal Graves, and large plastic Pedersen.

C H A P T E R 14

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| Female Genitalia

585

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
ask her to slide all the way down the examining table until her buttocks extend
slightly beyond the edge. Her thighs should be ﬂexed, abducted, and externally
rotated at the hips. Make sure her head is supported with a pillow.

External Examination
Assess the Sexual Maturity of an Adolescent Patient. You can
assess pubic hair during either the abdominal or the pelvic examination. Note its
characteristics and distribution, and rate it according to the Tanner stages,
described on p. 901.

Delayed puberty is often familial or
related to chronic illness. It may also
reflect disorders of the hypothalamus,
anterior pituitary gland, or ovaries.

Examine the External Genitalia. Seat yourself comfortably and warn
the patient that you will be touching her genital area. Inspect the mons pubis,
labia, and perineum. Separate the labia and inspect:

Excoriations or itchy, small, red maculopapules suggest pediculosis pubis (lice
or “crabs”), often found at the bases of
the pubic hairs.

■ The labia minora
■ The clitoris

An enlarged clitoris is seen in masculinizing endocrine disorders.

■ The urethral meatus

Inspect for urethral caruncle, prolapse
of the urethral mucosa (p. 597), and
tenderness in interstitial cystitis.

■ The vaginal opening, or introitus

Note any inﬂammation, ulceration, discharge, swelling, or nodules. Palpate any
lesions.

For descriptions of herpes simplex,
Behçet disease, syphilitic chancre, and
epidermoid cyst, see Table 14-1,
Lesions of the Vulva, p. 596.

Bartholin Glands. If the patient
reports labial swelling, examine the
Bartholin glands. Insert your index ﬁnger into the vagina near the posterior
introitus (Fig. 14-8). Place your thumb
outside the posterior part of the labium
majus. Palpate each side in turn, at
approximately the “4-o’clock” and
“8-o’clock” positions, between your
ﬁnger and thumb, checking for swelling or tenderness. Note any discharge
exuding from the duct opening of the
gland. If any is present, culture it.

A Bartholin gland may become acutely
or chronically infected, resulting in
swelling. See Table 14-2, Bulges and
Swelling of the Vulva, Vagina, and
Urethra, p. 597.

F I G U R E 1 4 - 8 . Palpate the Bartholin
gland.

586

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Internal Examination
Insert the Speculum. Select a speculum of appropriate size and shape,
and moisten it with warm water. (Lubricants or gels may interfere with cytologic
studies and bacterial or viral cultures.) Let the patient know you are about to insert
the speculum and apply downward pressure. Some clinicians carefully enlarge the
vaginal introitus by lubricating one ﬁnger with water and applying downward
pressure at its lower margin, then palpate the location of the cervix in order to
angle the speculum more accurately. Enlarging the introitus can ease insertion
of the speculum and the patient’s comfort. With your other hand (usually the
left), introduce the closed speculum past your ﬁngers at a downward slope
(Fig. 14-9). Avoid pulling on the pubic hair or pinching the labia as you open
and close the speculum. Separating the labia majora with your right hand helps
to avoid this.

FIGURE 14-9.

Gently insert the speculum.

The Small Introitus
Many virginal vaginal oriﬁces admit only a single examining ﬁnger. Modify your
technique so that you insert only your index ﬁnger. Using a small Pedersen speculum may allow limited inspection. When the vaginal oriﬁce is even smaller, an
adequate bimanual examination can be performed by placing one ﬁnger in the
rectum rather than in the vagina, but warn the patient ﬁrst.
Similar techniques may be indicated for an older woman if the introitus has
become atrophied and tight.

An imperforate hymen occasionally
delays menarche. Check for this possibility when menarche seems unduly
late in relation to the development of
a girl’s breasts and pubic hair.

Two methods help you to avoid placing pressure on the sensitive urethra:
(1) when inserting the speculum, hold it at an angle (Fig. 14-10), and then
C H A P T E R 14

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| Female Genitalia

587

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
(2) slide the speculum inward along the posterior wall of the vagina (Fig. 14-11),
applying downward pressure to keep the vaginal introitus relaxed.

FIGURE 14-10.

Entry angle.

FIGURE 14-11.
insertion.

Angle at full

After placing the speculum in the vagina, remove your ﬁngers of your other hand
from the introitus. Rotate the speculum into a horizontal position, maintaining
pressure posteriorly, and insert it to its full length (Fig. 14-12). Do not open the
blades of the speculum prematurely.
See Table 14-4, Variations in the Cervical
Surface, p. 599; Table 14-5, Shapes of
the Cervical Os, p. 600; and Table 14-6,
Abnormalities of the Cervix, p. 600.

FIGURE 14-12.

Insert the speculum to full length.

Inspect the Cervix. Open the speculum carefully. Rotate and adjust the
speculum until it cups the cervix and brings it into full view (Fig. 14-13). Fix the
speculum in its open position by tightening the thumbscrew. Position the light
until you can see the cervix well. When the uterus is retroverted, the cervix
points more anteriorly than illustrated. If you have difﬁculty ﬁnding the cervix,
withdraw the speculum slightly and reposition it on a different slope. If a
discharge obscures your view, wipe it away gently with a large cotton swab.
588

See retroversion of the uterus, p. 601.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Note the color of the cervix; its position and surface characteristics; and any
ulcerations, nodules, masses, bleeding, or discharge. Inspect the cervical os for
discharge.

Look for lateral displacement of the
cervix in endometriosis involving the
uterosacral ligaments.
A yellowish discharge on the endocervical swab commonly represents
mucopurulent cervicitis from C. trachomatis, N. gonorrhoeae, or herpes
simplex (p. 572). Raised, friable, or
lobed wart-like lesions are seen with
condylomata or cervical cancer.

F I G U R E 1 4 - 1 3 . Gently open and ﬁx the speculum.

Obtain Specimens for Cervical Cytology (Pap Smears). Obtain
one specimen from the endocervix and another from the ectocervix, or a
combination specimen using the cervical brush (“broom”). For best results the
patient should not be menstruating. She should avoid intercourse and use of
douches, tampons, contraceptive foams or creams, or vaginal suppositories for
48 hours before the examination. For sexually active women ages 26 years or
younger, and for other asymptomatic women at increased risk of infection, plan
to culture the cervix routinely for chlamydia.78

Obtaining the Pap Smear: Options for
Specimen Collection
Cervical Broom

Many clinicians use a plastic brush tipped with
a broom-like fringe to collect a single specimen containing both squamous and columnar
epithelial cells. Rotate the tip of the brush in
the cervical os, in a full clockwise direction,
then place the sample directly into preservative so that the laboratory can prepare the
slide (liquid-based cytology).
Alternatively, stroke each side of the brush on the glass slide. Promptly place
the slide in solution or spray with a ﬁxative as described on the next page.

Use of the cervical broom and liquidbased cytology is increasingly common and can also be used to test for
chlamydia and gonorrhea.

(continued )

C H A P T E R 14

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| Female Genitalia

589

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Obtaining the Pap Smear: Options for
Specimen Collection (continued )
Cervical Scrape

Place the longer end of the scraper in the cervical os. Press, turn, and scrape in a full circle,
making sure to include the transformation zone
and the squamocolumnar junction. Smear the
specimen on a glass slide. Set the slide in a safe
spot that is easy to reach. Note that doing the
cervical scrape ﬁrst reduces the presence of
red blood cells, which sometimes appear after
rotating the endocervical brush.
Endocervical Brush

Place the endocervical brush in the cervical os.
Roll it between your thumb and index ﬁnger,
clockwise and counterclockwise. Remove the
brush and smear the glass slide using a gentle
painting motion to avoid destroying any cells.
Place the slide into an ether–alcohol solution at
once, or spray it promptly with a special ﬁxative.
Note that for pregnant women, a cottontipped applicator, moistened with saline, is
advised in place of the endocervical brush.

Inspect the Vagina. Withdraw the speculum slowly while observing the
vaginal walls. As the speculum clears the cervix, release the thumbscrew and
maintain the open position of the speculum with your thumb. During withdrawal,
inspect the vaginal mucosa, noting its color and any inﬂammation, discharge,
ulcers, or masses.

Check for bulging in the vaginal wall. Remove either the upper or lower blade of
the speculum (or use a single-blade speculum) and ask the woman to bear down
so that you can assess the location of vaginal wall relaxation or the degree of
uterine prolapse.

Close the speculum as it emerges from the introitus, avoiding both excessive
stretching or pinching of the mucosa.

590

See Table 14-3, Vaginal Discharge,
p. 598.
Vaginal discharge often accompanies
infection from Candida, Trichomonas
vaginalis, and bacterial vaginosis.
Diagnosis depends on laboratory
tests because the sensitivity and specificity of discharge characteristics are
low.79,80 Vaginal cancer is rare; diethylstilbestrol (DES) exposure in utero
and HPV infection are risk factors.
Use of the lower blade as a retractor
during bearing down helps expose
anterior vaginal wall defects such as
cystoceles; likewise, use of the upper
blade helps expose rectoceles. The
standardized Pelvic Organ Quantification (POP-Q) system and diagram is
widely used.81 See Table 14-2, Bulges
and Swelling of the Vulva, Vagina, and
Urethra, p. 597.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Perform a Bimanual Examination. Lubricate the index and middle
ﬁngers of one of your gloved hands, and from a standing position, insert your
lubricated ﬁngers into the vagina, again exerting pressure primarily posteriorly.
Your thumb should be abducted, your ring and little ﬁngers ﬂexed into your
palm. Pressing inward on the perineum with your ﬂexed ﬁngers causes little, if
any, discomfort and allows you to position your palpating ﬁngers correctly. Note
any nodularity or tenderness in the vaginal wall, including the region of the
urethra and the bladder anteriorly.

Stool in the rectum may simulate a
rectovaginal mass, but unlike a malignant mass, it can usually be dented by
digital pressure. Rectovaginal examination confirms the distinction.

■ Palpate the cervix, noting its position, shape, consistency, regularity, mobility,

Cervical motion tenderness and/or
adnexal tenderness are hallmarks of PID,
ectopic pregnancy, and appendicitis.

and tenderness. Normally, the cervix can be moved somewhat without pain.
Feel the fornices around the cervix.
■ Palpate the uterus. Place your

See Table 14-7, Positions of the
Uterus, p. 601, and Table 14-8, Abnormalities of the Uterus, p. 602.

other hand on the abdomen
about midway between the
umbilicus and the symphysis
pubis. While you elevate the
cervix and uterus with your
pelvic hand, press your abdominal hand in and down, trying
to grasp the uterus between
your two hands (Fig. 14-14).
Note its size, shape, consistency, and mobility, and identify any tenderness or masses.

Uterine enlargement suggests pregnancy, uterine myomas (fibroids), or
malignancy.

FIGURE 14-14.

Palpate the uterus.

Now slide the ﬁngers of your pelvic hand into the anterior fornix and palpate
the body of the uterus between your hands. In this position, your pelvic
ﬁngers can feel the anterior surface of the uterus, and your abdominal hand
can feel part of the posterior surface.

Nodules on the uterine surfaces suggest myomas, or fibroids (see p. 602).

If you cannot feel the uterus with either of these maneuvers, it may be tipped
posteriorly (retrodisplaced). Slide your pelvic ﬁngers into the posterior fornix and feel for the uterus butting against your ﬁngertips. An obese or poorly
relaxed abdominal wall may also prevent you from feeling the uterus even
when it is located anteriorly.

See retroversion and retroflexion of the
uterus (p. 601).

C H A P T E R 14

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| Female Genitalia

591

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

■ Palpate each ovary. Place your ab-

Within 3 to 5 years after menopause,
the ovaries become atrophic and usually nonpalpable. In postmenopausal
women, investigate a palpable ovary
for possible ovarian cyst or ovarian
cancer. Pelvic pain, bloating, increased
abdominal size, and urinary tract
symptoms are more common in
women with ovarian cancer.47

dominal hand on the right lower
quadrant, and your pelvic hand in
the right lateral fornix (Fig. 14-15).
Press your abdominal hand in
and down, trying to push the adnexal structures toward your pelvic hand. Try to identify the right
ovary or any adjacent adnexal
masses. By moving your hands
slightly, slide the adnexal structures between your ﬁngers, if
possible, and note their size,
shape, consistency, mobility, and
tenderness. Repeat the procedure
on the left side.
FIGURE 14-15.

Palpate the ovaries.

Normal ovaries are somewhat tender. They are usually palpable in slender
relaxed women, but are difﬁcult or impossible to feel in women who are
obese or tense.

Adnexal masses can also arise from a
tubo-ovarian abscess, salpingitis or
inflammation of the fallopian tubes
from PID, or ectopic pregnancy. Distinguish such a mass from a uterine
myoma. See Table 14-9, Adnexal
Masses, p. 603.

Assess the Pelvic Floor Muscles for Strength and Tenderness.
After palpating the cervix, uterus, and ovaries, withdraw your examining ﬁngers
just clear of the cervix. Then spread them against the vaginal walls. Ask the
patient to squeeze around your ﬁngers as long and as hard as she can. Snug
compression of your ﬁngers, moving them upward and inward, that lasts 3 or
more seconds is full strength. Check for strength, tenderness during contraction,
appropriate relaxation after contraction, and endurance in all four vaginal
quadrants. Then, with your ﬁngers still placed against the vaginal walls inferiorly,
ask the patient to cough several times or to bear down (Valsalva maneuver). Look
for any urinary leakage during increased abdominal pressure. Watch for
abdominal muscle overrecruitment or tightening of the adductor or gluteal
muscles.

Muscle weakness arises from aging,
vaginal deliveries, and neurologic
conditions, and contributes to the
urine leakage of stress incontinence
during increased abdominal pressure.
Overrecruitment with tightening,
vaginal wall tenderness, and referred
pain signal pelvic pain from pelvic
floor spasm, interstitial cystitis, vulvodynia, and urethral spasm.

592

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

In patients with pelvic pain or vaginal wall tenderness, palpate the external pelvic ﬂoor muscles in a clockwise rotation to identify trigger points (Fig. 14-16).

Trigger point tenderness in these
muscles accompanies pelvic floor
spasm and pelvic floor dysfunction
from trauma, interstitial cystitis, or
fibromyalgia. Pelvic floor disorders,
present in ∼25% of all women and
≥30% of older women, include urinary
and fecal incontinence, pelvic organ
prolapse, and other sensory and emptying abnormalities of the lower urinary and GI tracts.2

Symphysis pubis

Ischiocavernosus muscle

Bulbocavernosus muscle

Recall that the ischiocavernosus and
bulbocavernosus muscles are innervated by the pudendal nerve, so pain
may be referred to the perineum and
urogenital structures. Trigger-point
pain over the levator ani, innervated
by the sacral nerve roots S3 to S5, may
be referred to the vagina. See also
p. 569.

Superficial transverse
perineal muscle
Perineal body

Levator ani muscles

F I G U R E 1 4 - 1 6 . Palpate the pelvic ﬂoor muscles.

Perform a Rectovaginal Examination if Indicated. The rectovaginal
examination (Fig. 14-17) has three primary purposes: to palpate a retroverted
uterus, the uterosacral ligaments, cul-de-sac, and adnexa; to screen for colorectal
cancer in women ages 50 years or older; and to assess pelvic pathology.

Nodularity and thickening of the
uterosacral ligaments occur in
endometriosis, also pain with
uterine movement.

After withdrawing your ﬁngers from the bimanual examination, change your
gloves and lubricate your ﬁngers as needed (see note below on lubricants). Slowly
reintroduce your index ﬁnger into the vagina and your middle ﬁnger into the rectum. Ask the patient
to strain down as
you do this to relax
her anal sphincter.
Mention that this
may stimulate an
urge to move her
bowels, but this will
not occur. Apply
pressure against the
anterior and lateral Retroverted
uterus
walls with the examining ﬁngers, and
downward pressure
with the hand on
the abdomen.

FIGURE 14-17.

Examine the rectovaginal area.

C H A P T E R 14

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| Female Genitalia

593

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Check the rectal vault for masses. If fecal blood testing is planned, change gloves
to avoid contaminating fecal material with any blood provoked by collecting the
Pap smear. After the examination, wipe off the external genitalia and rectum, or
offer tissues to the patient so that she can do it herself.

See Chapter 15, The Anus, Rectum,
and Prostate, pp. 621–623.

Using Lubricants
If you handle a tube of lubricant during a pelvic or rectal examination, let the
lubricant drop onto your gloved ﬁngers without allowing contact between the
tube and the gloves. This prevents contaminating the tube by touching it with
your gloved ﬁngers after completing the speculum examination. If you or your
assistant inadvertently contaminates the tube, discard it. Small disposable
tubes for use with only one patient circumvent this problem.

Hernias
Hernias of the groin occur in women as well as men, but they are much less
common. The examination techniques are basically the same as for men (see
pp. 553–555). A woman should also stand up to be examined. To feel an indirect
inguinal hernia, however, palpate in the labia majora and upward to just lateral
to the pubic tubercles.

Indirect inguinal hernias are the most
common type of hernias in women.
Femoral hernias rank second.

Special Techniques
Assessing Urethritis. To evaluate
possible urethritis or inﬂammation of the
paraurethral glands, insert your index ﬁnger
into the vagina and milk the urethra gently
outward from the inside (Fig. 14-18). Note
any discharge from or about the urethral
meatus. If present, culture it.

Causes of urethritis include infection
from C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoeae.

F I G U R E 1 4 - 1 8 . Milk the
urethra.

594

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Recording Your Findings
Note that initially you may use sentences to describe your ﬁndings; later you will
use phrases.
Recording the Physical Examination—Female
Genitalia
“No inguinal adenopathy. External genitalia without erythema, lesions, or
masses. Vaginal mucosa pink. Cervix parous, pink, and without discharge.
Uterus anterior, midline, smooth, and not enlarged. No adnexal tenderness. Pap
smear obtained. Rectovaginal wall intact. Rectal vault without masses. Stool
brown and negative for fecal blood.”
OR
“Bilateral shotty inguinal adenopathy. External genitalia without erythema
or lesions. Vaginal mucosa and cervix coated with thin white homogeneous
discharge with mild ﬁshy odor. After swabbing cervix, no discharge visible in
the cervical os. Uterus midline; no adnexal masses. Rectal vault without masses.
Stool brown and negative for fecal blood. pH of vaginal discharge >4.5”

These findings are consistent with
bacterial vaginosis.

C H A P T E R 14

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| Female Genitalia

595

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 14-1 Lesions of the Vulva

Cystic
nodule
in skin

Epidermoid Cyst
A small ﬁrm round cystic nodule in the labia suggests an
epidermoid cyst. These are yellowish in color. Look for the
dark punctum marking the blocked opening of the gland.

Warts

Venereal Wart (Condyloma Acuminatum)
Warty lesions on the labia and within the vestibule are
often condyloma acuminata from infection with human
papillomavirus.

Flat,
gray
papules

Syphilitic Chancre
This ﬁrm painless ulcer from primary syphilis forms ∼21 d
after exposure to Treponema pallidum. It may remain hidden
and undetected in the vagina and heals regardless of treatment
in 3–6 wks.

Secondary Syphilis (Condyloma Latum)
Large raised, round or oval, ﬂat-topped gray or white lesions
point to condylomata lata. These are contagious and, along
with rash and mucous membrane sores in the mouth, vagina,
or anus, are manifestations of secondary syphilis.

Shallow
ulcers on
red bases

Genital Herpes
Shallow small painful ulcers on red bases are suspicious for
infection from genital herpes simplex virus 1 or 2. Ulcers may
take 2–4 wks to heal. Recurrent outbreaks of localized vesicles,
then ulcers are common.
596

Carcinoma of the Vulva
An ulcerated or raised red vulvar lesion in an elderly woman
may be a vulvar carcinoma, usually a squamous cell carcinoma
arising on the labia.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 14-2 Bulges
and Swelling of the
Vulva, Vagina, and Urethra
Cystocele
A cystocele is a bulge of the
upper two thirds of the
anterior vaginal wall,
together with the bladder
above it. It results from
weakened anterior
supporting tissues.

Caruncle

Labial swelling

Urethral Caruncle
A urethral caruncle is a small
red benign tumor visible at
the posterior urethral
meatus. It occurs chieﬂy in
postmenopausal women and
usually causes no symptoms.
Occasionally, a carcinoma of
the urethra is mistaken for a
caruncle. To check, palpate
the urethra through the
vagina for thickening,
nodularity, or tenderness,
and palpate for inguinal
lymphadenopathy.
Bartholin Gland
Infection
Causes of a Bartholin gland
infection include trauma,
gonococci, anaerobes
like bacteroides and
peptostreptococci, and
C. trachomatis. Acutely, the
gland appears as a tense, hot,
very tender abscess. Look for
pus emerging from the duct
or erythema around the duct
opening. Chronically, a
nontender cyst is felt that
may be large or small.

Urethrocele
Cystocele

Prolapsed
urethral
mucosa

Cystourethrocele
When the entire anterior
vaginal wall, together with
the bladder and urethra,
produces the bulge, a
cystourethrocele is present.
A groove sometimes deﬁnes
the border between the
urethrocele and cystocele,
but is not always present.

Prolapse of the
Urethral Mucosa
Prolapsed urethral mucosa
forms a swollen red ring
around the urethral meatus.
It usually occurs before
menarche or after
menopause. Identify the
urethral meatus at the center
of the swelling to make this
diagnosis.

Rectocele
A rectocele is a herniation of
the rectum into the posterior
wall of the vagina, resulting
from a weakness or defect in
the endopelvic fascia.

Bulge

C H A P T E R 14

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| Female Genitalia

597

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 14-3 Vaginal Discharge

Discharge from a vaginal infection must be distinguished from a physiologic discharge. A physiologic discharge is clear or white,
may contain white clumps of epithelial cells, and is not malodorous. To distinguish vaginal from cervical discharges, use a large
cotton swab to wipe off the cervix. If no cervical discharge is present in the os, suspect a vaginal origin and consider the causes
below. Note that the diagnosis of cervicitis or vaginitis hinges on careful collection and analysis of the appropriate laboratory
specimens.79,80

Trichomonal
Vaginitis

Candidal Vaginitis

Bacterial Vaginosis

Lactobacilli

Cause

Trichomonas vaginalis, a
protozoan; often but not
always acquired sexually

Candida albicans, a yeast
(normal overgrowth of
vaginal ﬂora); many factors
predispose, including
antibiotic therapy

Bacterial overgrowth
probably from anaerobic
bacteria; often transmitted
sexually

Discharge

Yellowish green or gray,
possibly frothy; often
profuse and pooled in the
vaginal fornix; may be
malodorous

White and curdy; may be
thin but typically thick; not
as profuse as in trichomonal
infection; not malodorous

Gray or white, thin,
homogeneous, malodorous;
coats the vaginal walls;
usually not profuse, may be
minimal

Other Symptoms

Pruritus (though not usually
as severe as with Candida
infection); pain on urination
(from skin inﬂammation or
possibly urethritis);
dyspareunia

Pruritus; vaginal soreness;
pain on urination (from skin
inﬂammation); dyspareunia

Unpleasant ﬁshy or musty
genital odor; reported to
occur after intercourse

Vulva and Vaginal Mucosa

Vestibule and labia minora
may be erythematous; the
vaginal mucosa may be
diffusely reddened, with
small red granular spots or
petechiae in the posterior
fornix; in mild cases, the
mucosa looks normal

The vulva and even the
surrounding skin are often
inﬂamed and sometimes
swollen to a variable extent;
the vaginal mucosa is often
reddened, with white
tenacious patches of
discharge; the mucosa may
bleed when these patches are
scraped off; in mild cases,
the mucosa looks normal

The vulva and vaginal
mucosa usually appear
normal

Laboratory Evaluation

Scan saline wet mount for
trichomonads

Scan potassium hydroxide
(KOH) preparation for the
branching hyphae of
Candida

Scan saline wet mount for clue
cells (epithelial cells with
stippled borders); sniff for
ﬁshy odor after applying KOH
(“whiff test”); test the vaginal
secretions for pH > 4.5

598

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 14-4 Variations in the Cervical Surface
Two kinds of epithelia cover the cervix: (1) shiny pink squamous epithelium, which resembles the vaginal epithelium, and
(2) deep red, plushy columnar epithelium, which is continuous with the endocervical lining. These meet at the squamocolumnar
junction. When this junction is at or inside the cervical os, only squamous epithelium is seen. A ring of columnar epithelium is
often visible to a varying extent around the os—the result of a normal process that accompanies fetal development, menarche,
and the ﬁrst pregnancy.a
Squamous epithelium
Columnar epithelium

Squamous epithelium

Retention cyst

Cervical polyp

As estrogen stimulation increases during adolescence, all or
part of this columnar epithelium is transformed into squamous
epithelium by a process termed metaplasia. This change may
block the secretions of columnar epithelium and cause retention
cysts, also called nabothian cysts. These appear as translucent
nodules on the cervical surface and have no pathologic
signiﬁcance.

A cervical polyp usually arises from the endocervical canal,
becoming visible when it protrudes through the cervical os. It
is bright red, soft, and rather fragile. When only the tip is
seen, it cannot be differentiated clinically from a polyp
originating in the endometrium. Polyps are benign but may
bleed.

a

Terminology is in ﬂux. Other terms for the columnar epithelium visible on the ectocervix are ectropion, ectopy, and eversion.

C H A P T E R 14

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| Female Genitalia

599

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 14-5 Shapes of the Cervical Os
Normal

Oval

Slit-like

Types of Lacerations from Delivery

Bilateral transverse

Stellate

Unilateral transverse

Table 14-6 Abnormalities of the Cervix

Mucopurulent Cervicitis
Mucopurulent cervicitis produces purulent yellow drainage
from the cervical os, usually from Chlamydia trachomatis,
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, or herpes infection. These infections
are sexually transmitted and may occur without symptoms
or signs.

Carcinoma of the Cervix
Carcinoma of the cervix begins in an area of metaplasia. In its
earliest stages, it cannot be distinguished from a normal
cervix. In later stages, an extensive, irregular, cauliﬂower-like
growth may develop. Early frequent intercourse, multiple
partners, smoking, and infection with human papillomavirus
increase the risk for cervical cancer.

Vaginal adenosis

Fetal Exposure to Diethylstilbestrol (DES)
Daughters of women who took DES during pregnancy are at
greatly increased risk for several abnormalities, including
(1) columnar epithelium that covers most or all of the cervix,
(2) vaginal adenosis, i.e., extension of this epithelium to the
vaginal wall, and (3) a circular collar or ridge of tissue, of
varying shapes, between the cervix and vagina. Much less
common is an otherwise rare carcinoma of the upper vagina.

Columnar epithelium

Collar

600

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 14-7 Positions of the Uterus
Retroversion and retroﬂexion are usually normal variants.
Body of the uterus
may not be palpable

Palpable through
rectum

Normal angle
maintained

Cervix faces
forward

Retroversion of the Uterus
Retroversion of the uterus refers to a tilting backward of the entire uterus, including both the body and the cervix. It is a
common variant occurring in approximately 20% of women. Early clues on pelvic examination are a cervix that faces forward
and a uterine body that cannot be felt by the abdominal hand. In moderate retroversion, the body may not be palpable with either
hand. In marked retroversion, the body can be felt posteriorly, either through the posterior fornix or through the rectum. A
retroverted uterus is usually both mobile and asymptomatic. Occasionally, such a uterus is ﬁxed and immobile, held in place by
conditions such as endometriosis or PID.
May be palpable
through rectum

Angled back

Retroﬂexion of the Uterus
Retroﬂexion of the uterus refers to a backward
angulation of the body of the uterus in relation to
the cervix. The cervix maintains its usual position.
The body of the uterus is often palpable through the
posterior fornix or through the rectum.

C H A P T E R 14

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| Female Genitalia

601

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 14-8 Abnormalities of the Uterus

Myomas of the Uterus (Fibroids)
Myomas are very common benign uterine tumors.
They may be single or multiple and vary greatly in
size, occasionally reaching large proportions. They
feel like ﬁrm irregular nodules that are continuous
with the uterine surface. Occasionally, a myoma
projecting laterally is confused with an ovarian
mass; a nodule projecting posteriorly can be
mistaken for a retroﬂexed uterus. Submucosal
myomas project toward the endometrial cavity
and are not palpable, although they may be
suspected because of an enlarged uterus.

Myomas

Normal position
1

1st degree

Prolapse of the Uterus
Prolapse of the uterus results from weakness of the
supporting structures of the pelvic ﬂoor and is
often associated with a cystocele and rectocele. In
progressive stages, the uterus becomes retroverted
and descends down the vaginal canal to the
outside:
In ﬁrst-degree prolapse, the cervix is still well
within the vagina.
■ In second-degree prolapse, it is at the introitus.
■ In third-degree prolapse (procidentia), the cervix
and vagina are outside the introitus.
■

2nd degree
2
3rd degree

602

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 14-9 Adnexal Masses

Adnexal masses typically result from disorders of the fallopian tubes or ovaries. Three examples—often hard to differentiate—are
described. Note that inﬂammatory disease of the bowel (such as diverticulitis), carcinoma of the colon, and a pedunculated
myoma of the uterus may simulate an adnexal mass.

Ovarian Cysts and Ovarian Cancer
Ovarian cysts and tumors may cause adnexal masses on one or both sides.
Later, they may extend out of the pelvis. Cysts tend to be smooth and
compressible, tumors more solid and often nodular. Uncomplicated cysts
are not usually tender.
Small (≤6 cm in diameter), mobile, cystic masses in a young woman are
usually benign and often disappear after the next menstrual period.
Diagnosis of polycystic ovary syndrome rests on exclusion of several endocrine
disorders and two of the three features listed: ovulatory dysfunction,
androgen excess (hirsutism, acne, alopecia, elevated serum testosterone),
and conﬁrmation of polycystic ovaries on ultrasound. Roughly half of
affected women are obese, more than 40% have metabolic syndrome, and
∼40% have impaired glucose tolerance or diabetes.82,83
Ovarian cancer is relatively rare and usually presents at an advanced stage.
Symptoms include pelvic pain, bloating, increased abdominal size, and urinary
tract symptoms; often there is a palpable ovarian mass.47 Currently, there are no
reliable screening tests. A strong family history of breast or ovarian cancer is an
important risk factor but occurs in only 5% of cases.
Ectopic Pregnancy, Including Rupture
Ectopic pregnancy results from implantation of the fertilized ovum outside
the endometrial cavity, primarily in the fallopian tube (90% of cases).21,22
Ectopic pregnancy occurs in 1% to 2% of pregnancies worldwide and
remains an important cause of maternal morbidity and mortality. Clinical
presentation ranges from subacute, in ∼80–90% of cases, to shock from
rupture and intraperitoneal hemorrhage (10–30% of cases). Abdominal
pain, adnexal tenderness, and abnormal uterine bleeding are the most
common clinical features. In more than half of ectopic pregnancies, there is
a palpable adnexal mass that is typically large, ﬁxed, and ill-deﬁned, at times
with adherent omentum or small or large bowel. In milder cases, there may
be a prior history of amenorrhea or other symptoms of a pregnancy.
Risk factors include tubal damage from PID, prior ectopic pregnancy, prior
tubal surgery, age older than 35 yrs, presence of an IUD, subfertility (has
altered tubal integrity), and assisted reproductive techniques.
Pelvic Inﬂammatory Disease
PID is due to “spontaneous ascension of microbes from the cervix or
vagina to the endometrium, fallopian tubes, and adjacent structures.”84
85% of cases involve STIs or bacterial vaginosis affecting the fallopian
tubes (salpingitis) or the tubes and ovaries (salpingo-oophoritis), primarily
N. gonorrhoeae and C. trachomatis. Hallmarks of acute disease are adnexal,
cervical, and uterine compression tenderness. The diagnosis is imprecise,
however—only 75% have conﬁrmed pathogens on tubal laparoscopy. If
not treated, a tubo-ovarian abscess may ensue; 18% of treated patients
report infertility after 3 years. Infection of the fallopian tubes and ovaries
may also follow childbirth or gynecologic surgery.

C H A P T E R 14

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| Female Genitalia

603

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
REFERENCES

References
1. Johnson CT, Hallock JL, Bienstock JL, et al. (eds). Chapter 26,
Anatomy of the female pelvis. Johns Hopkins Manual of Gynecology
and Obstetrics. 5th ed. Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer/Lippincott
Williams and Wilkins; 2015:338.
2. Tarney CM. Ch.42, Urinary incontinence and pelvic ﬂoor disorders. Tarnay C.M. Tarnay, Christopher M. In: DeCherney AH,
Nathan L, Laufer N, et al., eds. Current Diagnosis & Treatment:
Obstetrics & Gynecology, 11e. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill; 2013.
Available at http://accessmedicine.mhmedical.com.libproxy.unm.
edu/content.aspx?bookid=498&Sectionid=41008634. Accessed
May 16, 2015.
3. Freeman EW, Sammel MD, Lin H, et al. Clinical subtypes of premenstrual syndrome and responses to sertraline treatment. Obstet
Gynecol. 2011;118:1293.
4. Pachman DR, Jones JM, Loprinzi CL. Management of menopauseassociated vasomotor symptoms: Current treatment options, challenges and future directions. Int J Womens Health. 2010;2:123.
5. North American Menopause Society. Estrogen and progestogen use
in postmenopausal women: 2010 position statement of the North
American menopause society. Menopause. 2010;17:242.
6. Coverdale JH, Balon R, Roberts LW. Teaching sexual historytaking: a systematic review of educational programs. Acad Med.
2011;86:1590.
7. Pancholy AB, Goldenhar L, Fellner AN, et al. Resident education
and training in female sexuality: results of a national survey. Sex
Med. 2011;8:361.
8. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexual orientation
and health among U.S. adults. National Health Interview Survey,
2013. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/lgbthealth/. Accessed
May 10, 2015.
9. Gates GJ, Newport F. Gallup Special Report: The US LGBT adult population. Washington, DC: Gallup, Inc; 2013. See also Gates GJ, Newport F. Special Report: 3.4% of U.S. Adults Identify as LGBT.
October 18, 2012. Available at http://www.gallup.com/poll/158066/
special-report-adults-identify-lgbt.aspx. Accessed May 11, 2015.
10. Gates GJ. Demographics and LGBT health. J Health Soc Behav.
2013;54:72.
11. Institute of Medicine. The Health of Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and
Transgender People: Building a Foundation for Better Understanding.
Washington, DC: National Institutes of Health; 2011. See also
Report at https://www.iom.edu/Reports/2011/The-Health-of-Lesbian-Gay-Bisexual-and-Transgender-People.aspx March 31, 2011.
Accessed May 11, 2015.
12. Daniel H, Butkus R, for the Health and Public Policy Committee of
the American College of Physicians. Lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgender health disparities: Executive summary of a policy
position paper from the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern
Med. 2015;163:135.
13. National LGBT Education Center. Available at http://www.lgbthealtheducation.org./ Accessed May 24, 2015.
14. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Lesbian, gay, bisexual,
and transgender health. Updated July 15, 2014. Available at
http://www.cdc.gov/lgbthealth./ Accessed May 24, 2015.
15. Williams Institute, UCLA. Available at http://williamsinstitute.law.
ucla.edu./ Accessed May 24, 2015.
16. Barbara AM, Doctor F, Chaim G. Asking the right questions 2.
Talking with clients about sexual orientation and gender identity

604

in mental health, counselling and addiction settings. Toronto Canada: Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, 2007. Available at
http://knowledgex.camh.net/amhspecialists/Screening_Assessment/
assessment/ARQ2/Pages/default.aspx. Accessed May 16, 2015.
17. Clark RD, Williams AA. Patient preferences in discussing sexual
dysfunctions in primary care. Fam Med. 2014;46:124.
18. Hatzichristou D, Rosen RC, Derogatis LR, et al. Recommendations
for the clinical evaluation of men and women with sexual dysfunction. J Sex Med. 2010;7(1 Pt 2):337.
19. Platano G, Margraf J, Alder J, et al. Psychosocial factors and therapeutic approaches in the context of sexual history taking in men:
a study conducted among Swiss general practitioners and urologists. J Sex Med. 2008;5:2533.
20. Kruszka PS, Kruszka SJ. Evaluation of acute pelvic pain in women.
Am Fam Physician. 2010;82:141.
21. Orazulike NC, Konje JC. Diagnosis and management of ectopic
pregnancy. Women’s Health (London). 2013;9:373.
22. Barnhart KT. Ectopic pregnancy. N Engl J Med. 2009;361:379.
23. Karnath BM, Breitkopf DM. Acute and chronic pelvic pain in
women. Hospital Physician. 2007;43:41.
24. Origoni M, Maggiore RMU, Salvatore S, et al. Neurobiological
mechanisms of pelvic pain. Biomed Res Int. 2014. Available at
http://www.hindawi.com/journals/bmri/2014/903848/cta/
25. Shin JH, Howard FM. Management of chronic pelvic pain. Curr
Pain Headache Rep. 2011;15:377.
26. International Pelvic Pain Society. History and physical. Pelvic pain
assessment form. Available at http://www.pelvicpain.org/Professional/Documents-and-Forms.aspx. Accessed May 23, 2015.
27. Giudice LC. Endometriosis. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:2389.
28. Sawaya GF, Kulasingam S, Denberg T, et al. Cervical cancer screening in average-risk women: Best practice advice from the Clinical
Guidelines Committee of the American College of Physicians. Ann
Intern Med. 2015;162:851.
29. Centers for Disease Control and Surveillance. 2013 sexually transmitted
disease surveillance. Human papillomavirus. Available at http://www.
cdc.gov/std/stats13/other.htm#hpv. Accessed May 17, 2015.
30. Moyer A, on behalf of the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.
Screening for cervical cancer: U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2012;150:
880.
31. American Congress of Obstetrician and Gynecologists. ACOG
Committee on Practice Bulletins–Gynecology. ACOG Practice Bulletin No. 131: Screening for cervical cancer. Cervical cytology
screening. Obstet Gynecol. 2012;120:1222.
32. Saslow D, Solomon D, Lawson HW, et al. American Cancer Society,
American Society for Colposcopy and Cervical Pathology, and
American Society for Clinical Pathology screening guidelines for
the prevention and early detection of cervical cancer. CA Cancer J
Clin. 2012;62:147.
33. Bloomﬁeld HE, Olson A, Greer N, et al. Screening pelvic examinations in asymptomatic, average-risk adult women: An evidence
report for a clinical practice guideline from the American College
of Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2014;161:46.
34. Qaseem A, Humphrey LL, Harris R, et al. Screening pelvic examination in adult women: a clinical practice guideline from the
American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2014;161:67.
35. Smith RA, Manassaram-Baptiste D, Brooks D, et al. Cancer screening in the United States, 2015: a review of current American cancer
society guidelines and current issues in cancer screening. CA Cancer J Clin. 2015;65:30.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
REFERENCES
36. Solomon D, Davey D, Kurman R, et al. The 2001 Bethesda system:
terminology for reporting results of cervical cytology. JAMA.
2004;291:2990.
37. Wright TC, Cox JT, Massad JS. 2001 consensus guidelines for the
management of women with cervical cytologic abnormalities.
JAMA. 2002;287:2120.
38. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Human papillomavirus: HPV information for clinicians, April 2007, p. 18. Cached–pdf
available under public.health.oregon.gov https://www.google.com
/#q=cdc+human+papillomavirus+hpv+information+for+clinician
s+april+2007. Accessed May 19, 2015.
39. Baseman JG, Kulasingam SL, Harris TG, et al. Evaluation of primary cervical cancer screening with an oncogenic human papillomavirus DNA test and cervical cytologic ﬁndings among women
who attended family planning clinics in the United States. Am J
Obstet Gynecol. 2008;199:26.e1–8.
40. Kulasingam SL, Hughes JP, Kiviat NB, et al. Evaluation of human
papillomavirus testing in primary screening for cervical abnormalities: comparison of sensitivity, speciﬁcity, and frequency of
referral. JAMA. 2002;288:1749.
41. Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Human papillomavirus vaccination.
Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization
Practices. MMWR. 2014;63(RR #5):1–30.
42. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Human papillomavirus. HPV Vaccine Information for Clinicians–Fact Sheet. July 8,
2012. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/std/hpv/STDFact-HPV-vaccine-hcp.htm. Accessed May 18, 2015.
43. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Youth risk behavior
surveillance–United States 2013. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/
healthyyouth/data/yrbs/results.htm. Accessed May 19, 2015.
44. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Condom effectiveness. Fact sheet for public health personnel. Updated March 25,
2013. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/condomeffectiveness/latex.
html. Accessed May 19, 2015.
45. Pierce Campbell CM, Lin HY, Fulp W, et al. Consistent condom use
reduces the genital human papillomavirus burden among highrisk men: the HPV infection in men study. J Infect Dis. 2012;208:373.
46. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Addendum to Screening for
ovarian cancer: Evidence update for the U.S. Preventive Services
Task Force reafﬁrmation recommendation statement. Other supporting document for ovarian cancer: screening, September 2012.
Available at http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/
Document/addendum-to-screening-for-ovarian-cancer-evidenceupdate-for-the-us-preventive-services-task-force-reafﬁrmation-recommendation-statement/ovarian-cancer-screening#conclusions.
Accessed May 19, 2015.
47. Jayson GC, Kohn EC, Kitchener HC, et al. Ovarian cancer. Lancet.
2014;384(9951):1376.
48. Rauh-Hain JA, Krivak TC, del Carmen MG, et al. Ovarian cancer
screening and early detection in the general population. Rev Obstet
Gyneco. 2011;4:15.
49. National Cancer Institute. Genetics of breast and gynecologic cancers–for health professionals (PDQ®). Updated April 3, 2015.
Available at http://www.cancer.gov/types/breast/hp/breast-ovariangenetics-pdq. Accessed May 19, 2015.
50. National Cancer Institute. Ovarian, Fallopian Tube, and Primary
Peritoneal Cancer Prevention–for health professionals
(PDQ®). Who is at risk? Updated May 15, 2015. Available at

http://www.cancer.gov/types/ovarian/hp/ovarian-preventionpdq. Accessed May 19, 2015.
51. Sherman ME, Piedmonte M, Mai PL, et al. Pathologic ﬁndings at
risk-reducing salpingo-oophorectomy: primary results from Gynecologic Oncology Group Trial GOG-0199. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32:
3275.
52. Dorigo O, Berek JS. Personalizing CA125 levels for ovarian cancer
screening. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2011;4:1356.
53. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2013 Sexually transmitted disease surveillance. Chlamydia. Updated December 16,
2014. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/std/stats13/chlamydia.htm.
Accessed May 19, 2015.
54. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Pelvic inﬂammatory
disease–CDC fact sheet. Updated May 4, 2015. Available at http://
www.cdc.gov/std/pid/stdfact-pid-detailed.htm. Accessed May 20,
2015.
55. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted
diseases. STDs and infertility. Updated December 16, 2014. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/std/infertility/default.htm. Accessed
May 19, 2015.
56. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted
diseases. Updated May 15, 2015. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/
std/default.htm. Accessed May 19, 2015.
57. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Recommendations (search
“Category – Infectious diseases”). Page current May 2015. Available at http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Search.
Accessed May 25, 2015.
58. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. HIV in the United
States: At a glance. Updated May 11, 2015. Available at http://www.
cdc.gov/hiv/statistics/basics/ataglance.html. Accessed May 25,
2015.
59. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. HIV/AIDS. HIV among
women. Updated March 6, 2015. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/
hiv/risk/gender/women/facts/index.html. Accessed May 20,
2015.
60. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. September 2014. Sexually
transmitted infections. Behavioral counseling. Current as of March
2015. Available at http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/
Page/Topic/recommendation-summary/sexually-transmittedinfections-behavioral-counseling1?ds=1&s=Counseling. Accessed
May 20, 2015.
61. O’Connor EA, Lin JS, Burda BU, et al. Behavioral sexual riskreduction counseling in primary care to prevent sexually transmitted infections: a systematic review for the U.S. Preventive Services
Task Force. Ann Intern Med. 2014;161:874.
62. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2010 STD treatment
guidelines. Clinical prevention guidance. Updated January 28,
2011. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment/2010/
clinical.htm. Accessed May 20, 2015.
63. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Reproductive health.
Teen pregnancy–About teen pregnancy. Updated May 19, 2015.
Available at http://www.cdc.gov/teenpregnancy/about/index.htm.
See also Unintended pregnancy prevention. Available at http://
www.cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/UnintendedPregnancy/index.
htm. Accessed May 20, 2015.
64. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Reproductive health.
Contraception. Updated April 22, 2015. Available at http://www.
cdc.gov/reproductivehealth/UnintendedPregnancy/Contraception.htm. Accessed May 21, 2015.

C H A P T E R 14

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| Female Genitalia

605

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
REFERENCES
65. Rossouw JE, Anderson GL, Prentice RL, et al; Writing Group for
the Women’s Health Initiative Investigators. Risks and beneﬁts of
estrogen plus progestin in healthy postmenopausal women: principal results from the Women’s Health Initiative randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2002;288:321.
66. Anderson GL, Limacher M, Assaf AR, et al; Women’s Health Initiative Steering Committee. Effects of conjugated equine estrogen in
postmenopausal women with hysterectomy: the Women’s Health
Initiative randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2004;291:1701.
67. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Menopausal hormone therapy: preventive medication. October 2012. Available at http://
www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Topic/recommendation-summary/menopausal-hormone-therapy-preventivemedication?ds=1&s=hormone replacement therapy. Accessed
May 21, 2015.
68. Nelson HD, Walker M, Zakher B, et al. Menopausal hormone therapy for the primary prevention of chronic conditions: a systematic
review to update the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendations. Ann Intern Med. 2012;157:104.
69. Mosca L, Benjamin EJ, Berra K, et al. Effectiveness-based guidelines for the prevention of cardiovascular disease in women—2011
update: a guideline from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2011;123:1243.
70. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Postmenopausal estrogen therapy: Route of administration and risk of
venous thromboembolism. Bulletin 556; April 2013. Available at
http://www.acog.org/Resources-And-Publications/CommitteeOpinions/Committee-on-Gynecologic-Practice/PostmenopausalEstrogen-Therapy. Hormone therapy and heart disease. Bulletin
565; June 2013. Compounded bioidentical menopausal hormone
therapy. Bulletin 532; August 2012. Available at http://www.acog.
org/Resources-And-Publications/Committee-Opinions/Committee-on-Gynecologic-Practice/Compounded-Bioidentical-Menopausal-Hormone-Therapy. Accessed May 21, 2015.
71. North American Menopause Society. The 2012 hormone therapy
position statement of: The North American Menopause Society.
Menopause. 2012;19:257.
72. Weitlauf JC, Frayne SM, Finney JW, et al. Sexual violence, posttraumatic stress disorder, and the pelvic examination: how do

606

beliefs about the safety, necessity, and utility of the examination
inﬂuence patient experiences? J Women’s Health. 2010;19:1271.
73. Linden JA. Care of the adult patient after sexual assault. N Engl J
Med. 2011;365:834.
74. Breiding MJ, Smith SG, Basile KC, et al. Prevalence and characteristics of sexual violence, stalking, and intimate partner violence
victimization–national intimate partner and sexual violence survey, United States, 2011. MMWR Surveill Summ. 2014;63:1.
75. World Health Organization. Sexual and reproductive health. Sexual violence. Available at http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/
topics/violence/sexual_violence/en/. See also Violence and injury
prevention. Guidelines for medico-legal care for victims of sexual
violence. Available at http://www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/pu. Accessed May 22, 2015.
76. American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Sexual
assault. Bulletin 592. April 2014. Available at http://www.acog.org/
Resources-And-Publications/Committee-Opinions/Committeeon-Health-Care-for-Underserved-Women/Sexual-Assault.
Accessed May 22, 2015.
77. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2010 STD treatment
guidelines. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/std/treatment/2010/
default.htm. Accessed May 22, 2015.
78. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Sexually transmitted
diseases. STD and HIV screening recommendations. Updated
December 16, 2014. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/std/prevention/screeningreccs.htm. Accessed May 20, 2015.
79. Wilson JF. In the clinic: vaginitis and cervicitis. Ann Intern Med.
2009;151:ITC3–1.
80. Eckhert LO. Acute vulvovaginitis. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:1244.
81. Bump RC, Mattiasson A, Bo K, et al. The standardization of terminology of female pelvic organ prolapse and pelvic ﬂoor dysfunction. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1996;175:10.
82. Legro RS, Arslanian SA, Ehrmann DA, et al. Diagnosis and treatment of polycystic ovary syndrome: an Endocrine Society clinical
practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 20(1398):4565.
83. Ehrmann LA. Polycystic ovary syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2005;
96:593.
84. Brunham RC, Gottleib SL, Paavonen J. Pelvic inﬂammatory disease. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:2039.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

C H A P T E R

15

The Anus, Rectum,
and Prostate
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (Vol. 14: Male Genitalia, Rectum, Anus, and Prostate;
Vol. 15: Female Genitalia, Anus, and Rectum)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com

Anatomy and Physiology
The sigmoid colon terminates at the rectum, which lies against the sacrum and coccyx, then merges with the short segment of the anal canal (Fig. 15-1). The rectum
extends from the rectosigmoid junction, anterior to the S3 vertebra, to the anorectal
junction at the tip of the coccyx. The external margin of the anal canal is poorly

Bladder

Peritoneal
reflection

Valve of Houston

Seminal vesicle

Rectum

Anorectal junction

Anal canal
Urethra

FIGURE 15-1.

Prostate

Anus and rectum—sagittal view.

C H A P T E R 15

| The Anus, Rectum, and Prostate

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

607

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
demarcated, but its moist hairless appearance usually distinguishes it from the surrounding perianal skin. The muscle actions of the voluntary external anal sphincter
and the involuntary internal anal sphincter normally hold the anal canal closed. The
internal anal sphincter is an extension of the muscular coat of the rectal wall.
Note carefully the angle of the anal canal, on a line roughly between the anus and
umbilicus. Unlike the rectum, the canal is liberally supplied by somatic sensory
nerves, and a poorly directed ﬁnger or instrument will produce pain.
A serrated line marking the change from skin to mucous membrane demarcates
the anal canal from the rectum (Fig. 15-2). This anorectal junction, often called
the pectinate or dentate line, is also the boundary between somatic and visceral
nerve supplies. It is easily visible on anoscopic or endoscopic examination, but
is not palpable.

Valve of Houston

Median sulcus
Prostate
Lateral lobe

Rectum
Levator ani muscle

Anorectal junction

Internal anal sphincter

External anal sphincter
Anal canal

FIGURE 15-2.

Anus and rectum—coronal view showing the anterior wall.

In the male, the prostate gland surrounds the urethra and lies next to the bladder
outlet. The prostate gland is small during childhood, but between puberty and
approximately age 20 years, it increases roughly ﬁvefold in size. Prostate volume
further expands as the gland becomes hyperplastic (see p. 623). The right and
left lateral lobes lie against the anterior rectal wall, where they are palpable as a
rounded, heart-shaped structure approximately 2.5 cm long. They are separated
by a shallow median sulcus or groove, also palpable. Note that the anterior and
central areas of the prostate cannot be examined. The seminal vesicles, shaped
like rabbit ears above the prostate, are also not normally palpable.
In the female, the uterine cervix usually is palpable through the anterior wall
of the rectum.

The rectal wall contains three inward foldings, called valves of Houston. The lowest of these can sometimes be felt, usually on the patient’s left. Most of the rectum
that is accessible to digital examination does not have a peritoneal surface, except
for the anterior rectum, which you may be able to reach with the tip of your
examining ﬁnger.
608

There may be tenderness from peritoneal inflammation or nodularity if
there are peritoneal metastases.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY

The Health History
Common or Concerning Symptoms and Signs
Change in bowel habits
Blood in the stool
● Pain with defecation; rectal bleeding or tenderness
● Anal warts or ﬁssures
● Weak urinary stream
● Burning with urination
● Blood in the urine
●
●

Other chapters have addressed many of the symptoms and signs related to the
anorectal area and the prostate. To review brieﬂy, ask about any change in the
frequency of bowel function, the size or caliber of the stools, diarrhea or constipation, or any abnormal color of the stools. Return to the discussion on
pp. 459–460 of these symptoms as well as queries about blood in the stool, ranging
from black tarry stools (melena), to bloody stools (hematochezia), to bright-red
blood per rectum. Also ask about the presence of mucus in the stool.

See Table 11-4, Constipation, p. 494
and Table 11-5, Black and Bloody
Stool, p. 495.

■ Be sure to ask about any personal or family history of colonic polyps or

Positive answers to these questions
indicate increased risk for colorectal
cancer and need for further testing.
(See Screening Recommendations,
Chapter 11, pp. 468–470.)

colorectal cancer. Is there any personal history of IBD?

■ Is there any pain on defecation? Any itching? Any extreme tenderness in

the anus or rectum? Is there mucopurulent discharge or bleeding? Any
ulcerations? Does the patient have anal intercourse?

■ Is there any history of anal warts or anal ﬁssures?

Change in stool caliber, especially
pencil-thin stools, may warn of colon
cancer. Blood in the stool may be from
polyps, carcinoma, gastrointestinal
bleeding, or hemorrhoids; mucus may
accompany villous adenoma, intestinal
infections, inflammatory bowel disease
(IBD), or irritable bowel syndrome (IBS).

Anorectal pain, itching, tenesmus, or
discharge or bleeding from infection
or rectal abscess suggest proctitis.
Causes include gonorrhea, chlamydia,
lymphogranuloma venereum, receptive anal intercourse, ulcerations of
herpes simplex, or chancres of primary
syphilis (see Table 13-1, Sexually
Transmitted Infections of Male
Genitalia, p. 557). Itching in younger
patients may be from pinworms.
Genital warts may arise from human
papillomavirus (HPV) or condylomata
lata in secondary syphilis. Anal fissures
are seen in proctitis and Crohn disease.

C H A P T E R 15

| The Anus, Rectum, and Prostate

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

609

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
■ In men, review the pattern of urination (see p. 462). Does the patient have

difﬁculty starting or holding back the urine stream? Is the ﬂow weak? What
about frequent urination, especially at night? Is there any blood in the urine
or semen or pain with ejaculation?

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

These genitourinary symptoms suggest benign prostatic hyperplasia
(BPH) or prostate cancer, especially in
men older than 70 years.1
The American Urological Association
(AUA) Symptom Score helps quantify
BPH severity and guide management
decisions.2 See Table 15-1, BPH Symptom Score: American Urological
Association, p. 620.

■ Also, in men, has there been sudden onset of irritative urinary tract symp-

toms (frequency, urgency, pain with urination), perineal and low back pain,
malaise, fever, or chills?

These symptoms suggest possible
acute prostatitis.

Health Promotion and
Counseling: Evidence and
Recommendations
Important Topics for Health Promotion
and Counseling
Prostate cancer prevention and screening
Colorectal cancer prevention and screening
● Counseling for sexually transmitted infections
●
●

Prostate Cancer Prevention and Screening. Prostate cancer is the
most frequently diagnosed nonskin cancer in the United States and the second
leading cause of cancer death in men (Fig. 15-3).3 The advent of prostatespeciﬁc antigen (PSA) testing in the late 1980s has been strongly associated with
an increasing number of men diagnosed with prostate cancer: by 2000, nearly
60% of American men reported PSA testing4; and the lifetime risk of diagnosis
with prostate cancer increased from 9% in 19855 to 15% in 2011.6 However,
the lifetime risk of dying from prostate cancer has remained around 3%.6
Figure 15-4 shows age-adjusted cancer incidence and mortality rates based on
data from the National Cancer Institute’s Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End
Results (SEER) program.6
Risk Factors. Age, ethnicity, and family history are the strongest risk factors for prostate cancer. Several guidelines suggest targeting these high-risk men
for early screening.7,8
FIGURE 15-3.
cancer screening.

610

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Discuss prostate

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

250

Rate per 100,000 Men

200

150

100

50
0
1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Year
Incidence

Mortality

F I G U R E 1 5 - 4 . Prostate cancer age-adjusted incidence and mortality rates,
United States, 1975 to 2012.

Risk Factors for Prostate Cancer
Age. Prostate cancer is rare before age 40 years; however, incidence rates begin
increasing rapidly after age 50 years.6 The median age at diagnosis is 66 years.
● Ethnicity. African American men have the highest incidence and mortality
rates from prostate cancer in the United States and among the highest in the
world.6,9 Compared to white men, a higher percentage of African American
men are diagnosed with prostate cancer before age 50 years. They are also
more likely to present with an advanced-stage cancer, even after adjusting for
access to care.10,11
● Family history. Genetics appear to play an important role in prostate cancer
risk. For men with one aﬀected ﬁrst-degree relative, namely, a father or brother,
risk of developing prostate cancer increases twofold; for men with two or three
aﬀected ﬁrst-degree relatives, risk increases 5- to 11-fold.12 The BRCA1 and
BRCA2 mutations also appear to confer increased risk of prostate cancer.13
● Other risk factors. Although the evidence is less convincing, other potential
risk factors include Agent Orange exposure among Vietnam veterans, diets
high in animal fat, obesity, and cigarette smoking.14–16 However, BPH, a common ﬁnding in older men, is not a risk factor for prostate cancer.
●

Prevention. Primary prevention aims to reduce the burden of disease
through interventions that prevent cancer from developing. There is no convincing evidence that any lifestyle modiﬁcation, such as consuming diets high in fruits
and vegetables or increasing physical activity, can prevent prostate cancer. Several
large studies have evaluated chemoprevention—giving a medication or dietary
supplement—to prevent prostate cancer from developing. The 5α-reductase
inhibitors (5-ARIs) ﬁnasteride and dutasteride block the conversion of testosterone to the more potent dihydrotestosterone, shrink prostate tissue, and are routinely used to treat men with BPH.1 Because male hormones are associated with
C H A P T E R 15

| The Anus, Rectum, and Prostate

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

611

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
developing prostate cancer, the 5-ARI medications have been considered for cancer
chemoprevention. Randomized controlled trials have shown that taking these
medications reduced the risk of developing prostate cancer by about 25%, an
absolute decrease of about 5 percentage points.17,18 However, these medications
were also associated with an increased risk for developing more aggressive prostate
cancers. Consequently, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has ruled against
marketing these medications for cancer prevention.19 A large randomized, placebocontrolled trial of the antioxidant vitamin E and the micronutrient selenium failed
to show that these agents protected against prostate cancer.20 In fact, men taking
vitamin E had a slightly increased risk for developing prostate cancer.21
Prostate Cancer Screening. Another key strategy for reducing the burden of cancer is screening, also known as secondary prevention. Screening for prostate
cancer means offering diagnostic tests such as the PSA test or the digital rectal examination (DRE) to men with no signs or symptoms of prostate cancer. If the PSA is
abnormal (usually a level >4.0 ng/mL) or the DRE is abnormal (due to a palpable
nodule, area of induration, or asymmetry), then men are referred for the diagnostic
gold standard—the prostate biopsy. Ideally, screening allows cancers to be found at
an early stage so that men can be offered curative aggressive treatments like surgery
or radiation. However, prostate cancer screening tests are not very accurate, so
screening programs have been controversial.

Prostate Cancer Screening Tests: Prostate-Speciﬁc
Antigen and the Digital Rectal Examination
PSA. PSA is a glycoprotein produced by prostatic epithelial cells that can be elevated by cancer, but also by BPH, prostate infections, or ejaculation, causing
results that are false positives. About 12 in 100 men have a PSA screening test
above the level of 4 ng/mL, but only 30% of these men will have prostate cancer
on biopsy (the positive predictive value).7 Overall, using a PSA level of 4 ng/mL
to deﬁne abnormal detects only 21% of prostate cancers (sensitivity), but 51% of
aggressive cancers, based on the microscopic appearance of cancer cells. The
associated speciﬁcity is 91%, which is the proportion of men without prostate
cancer with a normal test. Numerous modiﬁcations of PSA have been proposed
to increase its accuracy, including measuring changes over time (velocity), the
proportion of PSA that is not bound to protein (free), and the PSA density
(based on the prostate volume) as well as adjusting the cut-oﬀ for abnormal
based on the patient’s age or race. However, none of these strategies has been
shown to improve outcomes, and guidelines recommend against them.
DRE. The DRE explores for palpable abnormalities such as nodules, induration,
or asymmetry in the peripheral posterior and lateral areas of the prostate gland
closest to the examining ﬁnger; the DRE is unable to detect cancers in the
anterior and central areas of the gland. The sensitivity of DRE is 59%, and the
speciﬁcity is 94%.22 An estimated 28% of men with an abnormal DRE will have
prostate cancer on biopsy (positive predictive value). However, the majority
of prostate cancers detected by DRE have already spread beyond the prostate
gland, making them more diﬃcult to cure.23 Furthermore, the DRE is not very
reproducible (low kappa score)—even urologists have problems agreeing with
each other whether the DRE is abnormal.24

612

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Evidence about Screening. Prostate cancer screening has been very controversial. Some professional organizations began recommending routine screening with the PSA in the early 1990s,25,26 even though, as noted by the U.S.
Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), there was insufﬁcient evidence that
screening reduces prostate cancer mortality.27

The strongest evidence supporting screening comes from studies that randomize
subjects to screening or no screening, then follow these groups for many years
to determine if screening reduces prostate cancer mortality. Two major studies,
the European Randomized Study of Screening for Prostate Cancer (ERSPC)28 and
the Prostate, Lung Colorectal, and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial (PLCO), 29
were conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of screening. However, the study
results, ﬁrst reported in 2009, were conﬂicting.
The ERSPC, which randomized over 160,000 men ages 55 to 69 years in seven
European countries to receive either PSA screening alone every 2 to 4 years or
no screening, found that screening reduced death from prostate cancer by about
20%.28 The absolute risk reduction, however, was 0.7 in 1,000—meaning that
1,400 men would need to be screened twice in 9 years—and 48 cancers
detected—to prevent one prostate cancer death. A recent update after 13 years
of follow-up reported that the number of men needing screening and the number of cancers to be detected to prevent one prostate cancer death had dropped
to 800 and 27, respectively.30 However, the ERSPC screening group also had a
70% higher risk of diagnosis with prostate cancer. This is concerning because
evidence suggests that 42% to 66% of PSA-detected cancers are overdiagnosed—meaning that they would never cause problems during a man’s lifetime.31 Nonetheless, most men with screen-detected cancers undergo aggressive
treatment with surgery or radiation,32 which frequently leads to complications
such as erectile dysfunction, urinary incontinence, and bowel problems that
adversely affect quality of life.33
The PLCO randomized over 75,000 American men ages 50 to 74 years to either
screening with PSA and DRE or a control group with no screening.29 The PLCO
found no survival beneﬁt for screening after 13 years of follow-up, although the
screening arm had a 12% increased risk for cancer diagnosis.34 However, the
validity of the PLCO results has been questioned because many of the men
enrolled had already been screened before the study began, a substantial proportion of the men in the control group were also being screened during the study,
and only a fraction of men with abnormal PSA tests underwent biopsy.35
Screening Guidelines from Major Organizations. Major professional organizations, including the USPSTF,33 the American Cancer Society (ACS),7 and the
AUA,8 have all issued guidelines in recent years, summarized below. The USPSTF has issued a grade D rating for prostate cancer screening, recommending
against screening for asymptomatic men regardless of age, race, or family history. The USPSTF concluded that the harms of screening outweigh the beneﬁts.
The other organizations encourage providers to address screening average-risk
patients beginning at ages 50 or 55 years. Providers are encouraged to support
shared decision making because cancer-screening decisions are complex and
very sensitive to patient preferences regarding the potential beneﬁt and harms

C H A P T E R 15

| The Anus, Rectum, and Prostate

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

613

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
of screening. If the patient agrees to screening, PSA testing is recommended every 1 to 2 years; the DRE is considered optional. Providers should stop offering
screening when patients reach age 70 years, or whenever their life expectancy
drops below 10 years. Providers can consider offering screening beginning at
age 40 or 45 years to men at high risk for cancer—African Americans and those
with a family history of prostate cancer.

Prostate Cancer Screening Guidelines

Shared decision
making
Age to begin oﬀering screening
Average-risk
High-risk
Age to stop oﬀering
screening
Screening tests
Frequency of
screening
Biopsy referral
criteria

American Urological
Association8

American Cancer Society7

Yes

Yes (consider using decision aid)

40 yrs
40 yrs
Life expectancy
<10 yrs
PSA
DRE (optional)
Annual

50 yrs
40–45 yrs
Life expectancy
<10 yrs
PSA
DRE (optional)
Annual (biennial when PSA
< 2.5 ng/mL)
PSA ≥ 4 ng/mL
Abnormal DRE
Individualized risk assessment for
PSA levels 2.5–4 ng/mL

United States Preventive
Services Task Force33
Yes (when patient requests
screening)
No recommendation

No recommendation
No recommendation
No recommendation
No recommendation

Abbreviations: PSA, prostate-speciﬁc antigen; DRE, digital rectal examination.

Shared Decision Making. Helping patients make informed decisions about
screening can be challenging because of limited provider time for discussion of
these issues. One strategy, recommended by the ACS, is to use patient prostate
cancer screening decision aids, which can be provided in advance of a clinic
visit.7 Decision aids are educational tools that present facts about prostate cancer, discuss the options for screening and treatment, elicit patient values for
the outcomes, and provide guidance for discussing screening with a provider.
Studies have shown that using decision aids increases knowledge, reduces uncertainty about making decisions, and increases engagement in the decisionmaking process, although the effect on getting tested has been variable.36 A list
of decision aids for prostate cancer screening available online is below. When
providers discuss prostate cancer with patients, the American College of Physicians recommends eliciting the patient’s preferences and documenting them in
the clinical record.37
Resources for Prostate Cancer Information. Encourage men to take advantage of the many resources available to help them make decisions about prostate
cancer screening.

614

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

Decision Aids for Prostate Cancer Screening
Testing for Prostate Cancer, American Cancer Society, 2010:
http://www.cancer.org/acs/groups/content/@editorial/documents/
document/acspc-024618.pdf
● Prostate Cancer Screening: Take Time to Decide, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention 2013 (see also websites for African Americans and Hispanic
Americans): http://www.cdc.gov/cancer/prostate/basic_info/infographic.htm
● Prostate Cancer Screening: Should you get a PSA test?, Mayo Clinic:
http://www.mayoclinic.org/diseases-conditions/prostate-cancer/in-depth/
prostate-cancer/art-20048087
● PROSDEX: A PSA Decision Aid, University of Cardiﬀ:
http://prosdex.cf.ac.uk/index_content.htm
● Decision Aid Tool: Cancer Screening with PSA Testing, American Society of
Clinical Oncology: http://www.asco.org/sites/www.asco.org/ﬁles/psa_pco_
decision_aid_71612.pdf
All websites accessed February 24, 2015.
●

Colorectal Cancer Prevention and Screening. In 2008, both the
USPSTF and a collaborative multiorganizational group, consisting of the ACS
Colorectal Cancer Advisory Group, the U.S. Multi-Society Task Force
on Colorectal Cancer, and the American College of Radiology Colon Cancer
Committee, issued updated guidelines for colorectal cancer screening.38,39 These
guidelines are reviewed in Chapter 11, The Abdomen, on pp. 469–470. An
abbreviated summary is provided below.

See also further review of colorectal
screening guidelines in Chapter 11,
The Abdomen, pp. 469–470.

■ Offer patients at average risk for colorectal cancer a range of screening options

beginning at age 50 years: annual screening with high-sensitivity fecal occult
blood tests (including guaiac-based hemoccult tests and fecal immunochemical tests), colonoscopy every 10 years, or sigmoidoscopy every 5 years
(which can be combined with high-sensitivity fecal occult blood testing performed every 3 years). The multiorganizational group also endorsed the
options of double-contrast barium enema or computed tomography colonography every 5 years and periodic fecal DNA testing.39 Guidelines recommend against screening with fecal occult blood testing following a DRE.
Routine screening should continue until age 75 years.
■ Identify higher-risk persons based on a personal history of colorectal neoplasia

or long-standing IBD—or a family history of colorectal neoplasia, including
hereditary syndromes. These individuals will require intensive screening and
surveillance testing with colonoscopy; screening will begin at a younger age
and be repeated at shorter intervals than for those at average risk.
Counseling for Sexually Transmitted Infections. Anal intercourse
places men and women at risk for perianal and rectal abrasions and transmission
of human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) and other sexually transmitted
infections (STIs). Protective measures include abstinence from high-risk
behaviors (see pp. 547–550), use of condoms, vaccinations for hepatitis B and
HPV, and good hygiene.
C H A P T E R 15

| The Anus, Rectum, and Prostate

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

615

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Techniques of Examination
For many patients and clinicians, the rectal examination is an unwelcome part
of the physical examination. Although it may cause patient discomfort, it is rarely
painful. You may choose to omit the rectal examination in adolescents who have
no relevant complaints. In middle-aged or older adults, it is important for assessing concerning symptoms and may be part of prostate cancer screening. Be sure
to warn the patient about what he or she may feel—including pressure, possible
discomfort, and the slow gentle movement of your examining ﬁnger.

For suspicion of a colorectal cancer
consider lower endoscopy.

The Male Patient
Patient Positioning. Choose one of several suitable patient positions for
conducting the examination, with input from the patient when needed. Usually,
the side-lying position (Fig. 15-5) is satisfactory and allows good visualization of
the perianal and sacrococcygeal areas. Some clinicians ask the patient to stand
and lean forward with his upper body resting across the examining table and
hips ﬂexed, although this can seem less digniﬁed. In either position, your
examining ﬁnger cannot reach the full length of the rectum.

FIGURE 15-5.

Position the patient on the left side.

Ask the patient to lie on his left side with his buttocks close to the edge of the
examining table near you. Flexing the patient’s hips and knees, especially in the
upper leg, stabilizes his position and improves visibility. Drape the patient appropriately and adjust the light to ensure good visualization of the perirectal and
anal area. Glove your hands and spread the buttocks apart.
■ Inspect the sacrococcygeal and perianal areas for lumps, ulcers, inﬂammation,

rashes, or excoriations. Adult perianal skin is normally more pigmented and
somewhat coarser than the skin over the buttocks. Palpate any abnormal
areas, noting lumps or tenderness.

616

Anal and perianal lesions include
hemorrhoids, venereal warts, herpes,
syphilitic chancre, and carcinoma. A
linear crack or tear suggests anal fissure from large, hard stools, IBD, or
STIs. Consider pruritus ani if there is
swollen, thickened, fissured perianal
skin with excoriations.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Examine the anus and rectum. Lubricate your gloved index ﬁnger, explain to

the patient what you are going to do, and tell him that the examination may
trigger an urge to move his bowels but this will not occur. Ask him to bear
down as if having a bowel movement. Inspect the anus, noting any lesions.
■ Palpate the anal canal. As the patient bears down, place the pad of your

gloved and lubricated index ﬁnger over the anus (Fig. 15-6A). As the sphincter relaxes, gently insert your ﬁngertip into the anal canal in the direction
pointing toward the umbilicus (Fig. 15-6B). If you feel the sphincter tighten,
pause and reassure the patient. When, in a moment, the sphincter relaxes,
proceed.
A tender purulent reddened mass
with fever or chills suggests an anal
abscess. Abscesses tunneling to the
skin surface from the anus or rectum
may form a clogged or draining anorectal fistula. Fistulas may ooze blood,
pus, or feculent mucus. Consider
anoscopy or sigmoidoscopy for better
visualization.

A

B

FIGURE 15-6.

Gently examine the anal canal.

Occasionally, severe tenderness prevents entry and internal examination. Do
not apply force. Instead, place your ﬁngers on both sides of the anus, gently
spread the oriﬁce, and ask the patient to bear down.

Look for a lesion, such as an anal
fissure, that might explain
tenderness.

If you can proceed without undue discomfort to the patient, note:
■ The sphincter tone of the anus. Normally, the muscles of the anal sphinc-

ter close snugly around your ﬁnger. Initial resting tone reﬂects the integrity of the internal anal sphincter. To check external sphincter tone, ask
the patient to squeeze your ﬁnger with the rectal muscles.
■ Tenderness, if any

■ Induration

Sphincter tightness may occur with
anxiety, inflammation, or scarring.
Sphincter laxity occurs in neurologic
diseases, such as S2–S4 cord lesions,
and signals possible changes in the urinary sphincter and detrusor muscle.
Consider testing perianal sensation.
Induration may be caused by inflammation, scarring, or malignancy.

■ Irregularities or nodules
■ Palpate the rectal surface. Insert your ﬁnger into the rectum as far as possible.

Rotate your hand clockwise to palpate as much of the rectal surface as possible on the patient’s right side, then counterclockwise to palpate the surface posteriorly and on the patient’s left side (Fig. 15-7).
C H A P T E R 15

See Table 15-2, Abnormalities of the
Anus, Surrounding Skin, and Rectum,
pp. 621–622.

| The Anus, Rectum, and Prostate

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

617

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Note any nodules, irregularities, or induration. To
bring a possible lesion into
reach, take your ﬁnger off
the rectal surface, ask the
patient to bear down, and
palpate again.

Note any masses with irregular borders
suspicious for rectal cancer (Fig. 15-8).

FIGURE 15-7.

Palpate the rectal surface.

FIGURE 15-9.

Palpate the prostate gland.

FIGURE 15-8.

Rectal cancer.

■ Palpate

the prostate
gland. Then rotate
your hand further
counterclockwise so
that your ﬁnger can
examine the posterior
surface of the prostate
gland (Fig. 15-9). By
turning your body
slightly away from the
patient, you can feel
this area more easily.
Tell the patient that
examining his prostate
gland may prompt an
urge to urinate.

Sweep your ﬁnger carefully over the prostate
gland, identifying its lateral lobes and the
groove of the median sulcus between them
(Fig. 15-10). Note the size, shape, mobility,
and consistency of the prostate, and identify
any nodules or tenderness. The normal prostate is rubbery and nontender, with no evidence of ﬁxity to the surrounding tissues.

See Table 15-3, Abnormalities of the
Prostate, p. 623.

If possible, extend your ﬁnger above the prostate to the region of the seminal vesicles and
the peritoneal cavity and sweep the anterior
wall. Note any nodules or tenderness.

Findings include a rectal “shelf” of peritoneal metastases (see p. 615) or the
tenderness of peritoneal inflammation.

Gently withdraw your ﬁnger, and wipe the
anus or give the patient tissues. Note the
appearance of any fecal matter on your glove.

618

F I G U R E 1 5 - 1 0 . Palpate
the prostate lobes and median
sulcus.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS

The Female Patient
The rectum is usually examined after examining the female genitalia while the
woman is in the lithotomy position. This position allows you to conduct the
bimanual examination, delineate a possible adnexal or pelvic mass, test
the integrity of the rectovaginal wall, and may help you to palpate a cancer high
in the rectum.
If only a rectal examination is needed, the lateral position is satisfactory and
affords a better view to the perianal and sacrococcygeal areas. Use the same
techniques for examination that you use for men. Note that the cervix is readily palpated through the anterior rectal wall. Sometimes, a retroverted uterus
is also palpable. Do not mistake either of these, or a vaginal tampon, for a
suspicious mass.

Recording Your Findings
Note that initially you may use sentences to describe your ﬁndings; later you will
use phrases.
Recording the Anus, Rectum, and
Prostate Examination
“No perirectal lesions or ﬁssures. External sphincter tone intact. Rectal vault
without masses. Prostate smooth and nontender with palpable median sulcus.
(Or in a female, uterine cervix nontender.) Stool brown; no fecal blood.”
OR
“Perirectal area inﬂamed; no ulcerations, warts, or discharge. Unable to examine external sphincter, rectal vault, or prostate because of spasm of external
sphincter and marked inﬂammation and tenderness of anal canal.”
OR
“No perirectal lesions or ﬁssures. External sphincter tone intact. Rectal vault
without masses. Left lateral prostate lobe with 1 × 1 cm ﬁrm, hard nodule; right
lateral lobe smooth; median sulcus obscured. Stool brown; no fecal blood.”

C H A P T E R 15

These findings suggest proctitis from
infectious cause.

These findings are suspicious for
prostate cancer.

| The Anus, Rectum, and Prostate

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

619

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 15-1 BPH
Symptom Score: American Urological
Association

Score or ask the patient to score each of the questions below. Higher scores (maximum 35) indicate more severe symptoms;
scores ≤7 are considered mild and generally do not warrant treatment.

Not at
All

Less
Than 1
Time in 5

Less
Than
Half the
Time

About
Half the
Time

More
Than
Half the
Time

Almost
Always

1. Incomplete emptying: Over the
past month, how often have
you had a sensation of not
emptying your bladder
completely after you ﬁnished
urinating?

0

1

2

3

4

5

2. Frequency: Over the past
month, how often have you had
to urinate again <2 hours after
you ﬁnished urinating?

0

1

2

3

4

5

3. Intermittency: Over the past
month, how often have you
stopped and started again
several times when you
urinated?

0

1

2

3

4

5

4. Urgency: Over the past month,
how often have you found it
difﬁcult to postpone urination?

0

1

2

3

4

5

5. Weak stream: Over the past
month, how often have you had
a weak urinary stream?

0

1

2

3

4

5

6. Straining: Over the past month,
how often have you had to
push or strain to begin
urination?

0

1

2

3

4

5

None

1 Time

2 Times

3 Times

4 Times

5 Times

0

1

2

3

4

5

PART A

PART B

7. Nocturia: Over the past month,
how many times did you most
typically get up to urinate from
the time you went to bed at night
until the time you got up in the
morning?

Total
Points
for Each
Row

Points for
Part B

TOTAL PARTS A and B (maximum 35)________
Adapted from: Madsen FA, Bruskewitz RC. Clinical manifestations of benign prostatic hyperplasia. Urol Clin North Am. 1995:22:291.

620

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 15-2 Abnormalities
of the Anus,
Surrounding Skin, and Rectum

Pilonidal Cyst and Sinus
A pilonidal cyst is a fairly common, probably congenital,
abnormality located in the midline superﬁcial to the coccyx
or the lower sacrum. Look for the opening of a sinus tract,
sometimes with a small tuft of hair surrounded by a halo of
erythema. Pilonidal cysts are generally asymptomatic, except
for slight drainage, but abscess formation and secondary sinus
tracts may occur.

Location

External Hemorrhoids
(Thrombosed )

External hemorrhoids are
dilated hemorrhoidal veins
that originate below the
pectinate line that are covered
with skin. They seldom
produce symptoms unless
thrombosis occurs.
Thrombosis causes acute local
pain that increases with
defecation and sitting. A
tender, swollen, bluish, ovoid
mass is visible at the anal
margin.

Prolapse of the Rectum

Internal Hemorrhoids
(Prolapsed )
Anterior

Posterior

Internal hemorrhoids are
enlargements of the normal
vascular cushions located
above the pectinate line,
usually not palpable. Internal
hemorrhoids may cause
bright-red bleeding,
especially during defecation.
They may also prolapse
through the anal canal and
appear as reddish, moist,
protruding masses, typically
located in one or more of the
positions illustrated.

On straining for a bowel movement, the rectal mucosa, with
or without its muscular wall, may prolapse through the anus,
appearing as a doughnut or rosette of red tissue. A prolapse
involving only mucosa is relatively small and shows radiating
folds, as illustrated. When the entire bowel wall is involved,
the prolapse is larger and covered by concentrically circular
folds.

(continued)

C H A P T E R 15

| The Anus, Rectum, and Prostate

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

621

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 15-2 Abnormalities
of the Anus,

Surrounding Skin, and Rectum (Continued )

Anal Fissure

Anorectal Fistula

Opening

Fissure
Sentinel tag

Fistula

An anal ﬁssure is a very painful oval ulceration of the anal
canal, found most commonly in the midline posteriorly, less
commonly in the midline anteriorly. Its long axis lies
longitudinally. There may be a swollen “sentinel” skin tag just
below it. Gentle separation of the anal margins may reveal the
lower edge of the ﬁssure. The sphincter is spastic; the
examination is painful. Local anesthesia may be required.

An anorectal ﬁstula is an inﬂammatory tract or tube that
opens at one end into the anus or rectum and at the other end
onto the skin surface (as shown here) or into another viscus.
An abscess usually antedates such a ﬁstula. Look for the
ﬁstulous opening or openings anywhere in the skin around
the anus.

Polyps of the Rectum

Cancer of the Rectum

Polyps of the rectum are fairly common. Variable in size and
number, they can develop on a stalk (pedunculated) or lie on
the mucosal surface (sessile). They are soft and may be difﬁcult
or impossible to feel even when in reach of the examining
ﬁnger. Endoscopy and biopsy are needed for differentiation of
benign from malignant lesions.

Illustrated here is the ﬁrm, nodular, rolled edge of an
ulcerated cancer.

Rectal Shelf

622

Widespread peritoneal metastases from any source may
develop in the area of the peritoneal reﬂection anterior to the
rectum. A ﬁrm to hard nodular rectal “shelf” may be just
palpable with the tip of the examining ﬁnger. In a woman,
this shelf of metastatic tissue develops in the rectouterine
pouch, behind the cervix and the uterus.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 15-3 Abnormalities of the Prostate
Normal Prostate Gland

As palpated through the anterior rectal wall, the normal prostate is a rounded, heartshaped structure approximately 2.5 cm long. The median sulcus can be palpated
between the two lateral lobes. Only the posterior surface of the prostate is palpable.
Anterior and central lesions, including those that obstruct the urethra, are not
detectable by physical examination.

Prostatitis

Acute bacterial prostatitis, illustrated here, presents with fever and urinary tract
symptoms such as frequency, urgency, dysuria, incomplete voiding, and sometimes
low back pain. The gland feels tender, swollen, “boggy,” and warm. Examine it gently.
More than 80% of infections are caused by gram-negative aerobes such as Escherichia
coli, Enterococcus, and Proteus. In men younger than age 35 yrs, consider sexual
transmission of Neisseria gonorrhea and Chlamydia trachomatis.
Chronic bacterial prostatitis is associated with recurrent urinary tract infections, usually
from the same organism. Men may be asymptomatic or have symptoms of dysuria or
mild pelvic pain. The prostate gland may feel normal, without tenderness or swelling.
Cultures of prostatic ﬂuid usually show infection with E. coli.
It may be challenging to distinguish these conditions from the more common chronic
pelvic pain syndrome, seen in up to 80% of symptomatic men who report obstructive
or irritative symptoms on voiding but show no evidence of prostate or urinary tract
infection. Physical examination ﬁndings are not predictable, but examination is
needed to assess any prostate induration or asymmetry suggestive of carcinoma.

Benign Prostatic Hyperplasia

BPH is a nonmalignant enlargement of the prostate gland that increases with age,
present in more than 50% of men by age 50 yrs. Symptoms arise both from smoothmuscle contraction in the prostate and bladder neck and from compression of the
urethra. They may be irritative (urgency, frequency, nocturia), obstructive (decreased
stream, incomplete emptying, straining), or both, and are seen in more than one third
of men by age 65 yrs. The affected gland may be normal in size, or may feel
symmetrically enlarged, smooth, and ﬁrm, though slightly elastic; there may be
obliteration of the median sulcus and more notable protrusion into the rectal lumen.

Prostate Cancer

Prostate cancer is suggested by an area of hardness in the gland. A distinct hard
nodule that alters the contour of the gland may or may not be palpable. As the cancer
enlarges, it feels irregular and may extend beyond the conﬁnes of the gland. The
median sulcus may be obscured. Hard areas in the prostate are not always malignant.
They may also result from prostatic stones, chronic inﬂammation, and other
conditions.

C H A P T E R 15

| The Anus, Rectum, and Prostate

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

623

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
REFERENCES

References
1. McVary, KT. BPH: epidemiology and comorbidities. Am J Manag
Care 2006;12(5 Suppl):S122.
2. Barry MJ, Fowler FJ Jr., O’Leary MP, et al. The American Urological
Association symptom index for benign prostatic hyperplasia. The
Measurement Committee of the American Urological Association.
J Urol. 1992;148:1549.
3. Siegel RL, Miller KD, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2015. CA Cancer J
Clin. 2015;65:5.
4. Ross LE, Coates RJ, Breen N, et al. Prostate-speciﬁc antigen test use
reported in the 2000 National Health Interview Survey. Prev Med.
2004;38:732.
5. Seidman H, Mushinski MH, Gelb SK, et al. Probabilities of eventually developing or dying of cancer–United States, 1985. CA Cancer
J Clin. 1985;35:36.
6. Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, et al. (eds). SEER Cancer Statistics Review, 1975–2012. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute.
http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2012/, based on November 2014
SEER data submission, posted to the SEER website, April 2015.
7. Wolf AM, Wender RC, Etzioni RB, et al. American Cancer Society
guideline for the early detection of prostate cancer: update 2010.
CA Cancer J Clin. 2010;60:70.
8. Carter HB, Albertsen PC, Barry MJ, et al. Early detection of prostate
cancer: AUA Guideline. J Urol. 2013;190:419.
9. Jemal A, Center MM, DeSantis C, et al. Global patterns of cancer
incidence and mortality rates and trends. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2010;19:1893.
10. Parker PM, Rice KR, Sterbis JR, et al. Prostate cancer in men less
than the age of 50: a comparison of race and outcomes. Urology.
2011;78:110.
11. Hoffman RM, Gilliland FD, Eley JW, et al. Racial and ethnic differences in advanced-stage prostate cancer: the Prostate Cancer Outcomes Study. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2001;93:388.
12. Steinberg GD, Carter BS, Beaty TH, et al. Family history and the
risk of prostate cancer. Prostate. 1990;17:337.
13. Bancroft EK, Page EC, Castro E, et al. Targeted Prostate Cancer
Screening in BRCA1 and BRCA2 Mutation Carriers: Results from
the Initial Screening Round of the IMPACT Study. Eur Urol. 2014;
66(3):489–499.
14. Chamie K, DeVere White RW, Lee D, et al. Agent Orange exposure,
Vietnam War veterans, and the risk of prostate cancer. Cancer.
2008;113:2464.
15. Sinha R, Park Y, Graubard BI, et al. Meat and meat-related compounds and risk of prostate cancer in a large prospective cohort
study in the United States. Am J Epidemiol. 2009;170:1165.
16. Huncharek M, Haddock KS, Reid R, et al. Smoking as a risk factor
for prostate cancer: a meta-analysis of 24 prospective cohort studies. Am J Public Health. 2010;100:693.
17. Thompson IM, Goodman PJ, Tangen CM, et al. The inﬂuence of
ﬁnasteride on the development of prostate cancer. N Engl J Med.
2003;349:215.
18. Andriole GL, Bostwick DG, Brawley OW, et al. Effect of dutasteride
on the risk of prostate cancer. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:1192.
19. Theoret MR, Ning YM, Zhang JJ, et al. The risks and beneﬁts of
5alpha-reductase inhibitors for prostate-cancer prevention. N Engl
J Med. 2011;365:97.
20. Lippman SM, Klein EA, Goodman PJ, et al. Effect of selenium
and vitamin E on risk of prostate cancer and other cancers: the

624

Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT). JAMA.
2009;301:39.
21. Klein EA, Thompson IM Jr., Tangen CM, et al. Vitamin E and the
risk of prostate cancer: the Selenium and Vitamin E Cancer Prevention Trial (SELECT). JAMA. 2011;306:1549.
22. Hoogendam A, Buntinx F, de Vet HC. The diagnostic value of digital rectal examination in primary care screening for prostate cancer: a meta-analysis. Fam Pract. 1999;16:621.
23. Coley CM, Barry MJ, Fleming C, et al. Early detection of prostate
cancer. Part I: Prior probability and effectiveness of tests. The
American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 1997;126:394.
24. Smith DS, Catalona WJ. Interexaminer variability of digital rectal
examination in detecting prostate cancer. Urology. 1995;45:70.
25. Mettlin C, Jones G, Averette H, et al. Deﬁning and updating the
American Cancer Society guidelines for the cancer-related checkup:
prostate and endometrial cancers. CA Cancer J Clin. 1993;43:42.
26. Early detection of prostate cancer and use of transrectal ultrasound. In: Association AU, ed. American Urological Association 1992
Policy Statement Book. Baltimore, MA: American Urological Association; 1992.
27. Harris R, Lohr KN. Screening for prostate cancer: an update of the
evidence for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern
Med. 2002;137:917.
28. Schroder FH, Hugosson J, Roobol MJ, et al. Screening and prostate-cancer mortality in a randomized European study. N Engl J
Med. 2009;360:1320.
29. Andriole GL, Crawford ED, Grubb RL 3rd, et al. Mortality results
from a randomized prostate-cancer screening trial. N Engl J Med.
2009;360:1310.
30. Schroder FH, Hugosson J, Roobol MJ, et al. Screening and prostate
cancer mortality: results of the European Randomised Study of
Screening for Prostate Cancer (ERSPC) at 13 years of follow-up.
Lancet. 2014;384:2027.
31. Draisma G, Etzioni R, Tsodikov A, et al. Lead time and overdiagnosis in prostate-speciﬁc antigen screening: importance of methods and context. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2009;101:374.
32. Cooperberg MR, Broering JM, Carroll PR. Time trends and local
variation in primary treatment of localized prostate cancer. J Clin
Oncol. 2010;28:1117.
33. Moyer VA. Screening for prostate cancer: U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2012;157:120.
34. Andriole GL, Crawford ED, Grubb RL, 3rd, et al. Prostate cancer
screening in the randomized Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial: mortality results after 13 years of
follow-up. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2012;104:125.
35. Hoffman RM. Clinical practice. Screening for prostate cancer.
N Engl J Med. 2011;365:2013.
36. Volk RJ, Hawley ST, Kneuper S, et al. Trials of decision aids for
prostate cancer screening: a systematic review. Am J Prev Med.
2007;33:428.
37. Qaseem A, Barry MJ, Denberg TD, et al. Screening for prostate cancer: a guidance statement from the Clinical Guidelines Committee
of the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 2013;158:761.
38. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for colorectal cancer. Recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2008;149:627.
39. Levin B, Lieberman DA, McFarland B, et al. Screening and surveillance for the early detection of colorectal cancer and adenomatous
polyps, 2008: a joint guideline from the American Cancer Society,
the US Multi-Society Task Force on Colorectal Cancer, and the
American College of Radiology. CA Cancer J Clin. 2008;58:130.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

