http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

C H A P T E R

6

The Skin, Hair, and Nails
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (Vol. 6: Skin)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com

In this edition, you will ﬁnd a helpful new approach to examining the skin, hair,
and nails and many new tables and photographs. This approach features careful
history taking; thorough inspection and palpation of benign and suspicious
lesions to better detect the three major skin cancers—basal cell carcinoma (BCC),
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), and melanoma; focused techniques for assessing
changes in the hair and nails; accurate use of terminology to describe your ﬁndings; and visual familiarity with important common benign and malignant skin
conditions. Updated information on skin cancer prevention and screening is
found in the section on Health Promotion and Counseling.

Anatomy and Physiology
The skin keeps the body in homeostasis despite daily assaults from the environment. It retains body ﬂuids while protecting underlying tissues from microorganisms, harmful substances, and radiation. It modulates body temperature and
synthesizes vitamin D. Hair, nails, and sebaceous and sweat glands are considered appendages of the skin. The skin and its appendages undergo many
changes during aging.

Turn to Chapter 20, The Older Adult,
pp. 955–1008, to review skin changes
with aging.

Skin
The skin is the heaviest single organ of the body, accounting for approximately
16% of body weight and covering an area of roughly 1.2 to 2.3/m2. It contains
three layers: the epidermis, the dermis, and the subcutaneous tissues.
The most superﬁcial layer, the epidermis, is thin avascular keratinized epithelium
consisting of two layers: an outer horny stratum corneum of dead keratinized
cells; and an inner cellular layer, the stratum basale and the stratum spinosum, also
known as the malpighian layer, where both melanin and keratin are formed.
Migration from the inner to the outer layer takes approximately 1 month.
CHAPTER 6

| The Skin, Hair, and Nails

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

173

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

Hair shaft
Duct of
sweat gland

Afferent nerve
endings
Horny layer
Cellular layer

Epidermis

Sebaceous
gland
Muscle that
erects hair shaft

Dermis

Sweat gland
Hair follicle

Subcutaneous
(adipose) tissue

Vein

Deep fascia

Nerve

Skeletal muscle

Artery

Vascular and lymphatic
capillary beds in
superficial dermis

FIGURE 6-1.

Anatomy of the skin.

The epidermis depends on the underlying vascularized dermis for nutrition. The
dermis is a dense layer of interconnecting collagen and elastic ﬁbers containing
sebaceous glands, sweat glands, hair follicles, and most of the terminals of the
cutaneous nerves (Fig. 6-1). Inferiorly, the dermis merges with subcutaneous fatty
tissue, or adipose tissue.
Normal skin color depends on the amount and type of melanin, but is also inﬂuenced by underlying vascular structures, changing hemodynamics, and changes
in carotene and bilirubin. The amount of melanin, a brownish pigment, is genetically determined and increased by exposure to sunlight. Hemoglobin in the red
blood cells transports oxygen in the form of oxyhemoglobin, a bright red pigment
in the arteries and capillaries that causes reddening of the skin. After passing
through the capillary bed and releasing oxygen to the tissues, the darker bluer
pigment of deoxyhemoglobin circulates in the veins. The scattering of light through
the turbid superﬁcial layers of the skin or blood vessels also makes the veins look
bluer and less red than circulating venous blood.
Carotene, a yellow pigment, is found in the subcutaneous fat and heavily keratinized areas such as the palms and soles. Bilirubin, a yellow-brown pigment, arises
from the breakdown of heme in the red blood cells.

Pallor indicates anemia.

Cyanosis, a blue color, can indicate
decreased oxygen in the blood or
decreased blood flow in response
to a cold environment.

Jaundice, or yellowing of the skin,
results from increased bilirubin.

Hair
Adults have two types of hair: vellus hair, which is short, ﬁne, inconspicuous, and
relatively unpigmented; and terminal hair, which is coarser, thicker, more
conspicuous, and usually pigmented. Scalp hair and eyebrows are examples of
terminal hair.
174

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY

Nails

Lateral
nail fold

Nails protect the distal ends of the ﬁngers and toes. The ﬁrm rectangular and
usually curving nail plate gets its pink color from the vascular nail bed to which
the plate is ﬁrmly attached (Figs. 6-2 and 6-3). Note the whitish moon, or lunula,
and the free edge of the nail plate. Roughly one-fourth of the nail plate, the nail
root, is covered by the proximal nail fold. The cuticle extends from the fold and,
functioning as a seal, protects the space between the fold and the plate from
external moisture. Lateral nail folds cover the sides of the nail plate. Note that the
angle between the proximal nail fold and nail plate is normally less than 180°.

Lunula

Free edge Nail plate Cuticle

FIGURE 6-2.
ﬁngernail.

Fingernails grow approximately 0.1 mm daily; toenails grow more slowly.

Proximal
nail fold

Sebaceous Glands and Sweat Glands

Anatomy of the

Proximal nail fold Nail root
Nail plate

Sebaceous glands produce a fatty substance secreted onto the skin surface through the
hair follicles. These glands are present on all skin surfaces except the palms and soles.
Sweat glands are of two types: eccrine and apocrine. The eccrine glands are widely
distributed, open directly onto the skin surface, and by their sweat production
help to control body temperature. In contrast, the apocrine glands are found
chieﬂy in the axillary and genital regions and usually open into hair follicles.
Bacterial decomposition of apocrine sweat is responsible for adult body odor.

Cross section
of nail plate Nail bed Distal phalanx

FIGURE 6-3.
ﬁngernail.

Cross-section of

The Health History
Common or Concerning Symptoms
Growths
Rashes
● Hair loss or nail changes
●
●

Growths. Start by asking if the patient is concerned about any new growths
or rashes: “Have you noticed any changes in your skin? … your hair? … your
nails?” “Have you had any rashes? … sores? … lumps? … itching?” If the patient
reports a new growth, it is important to pursue the patient’s personal and family
history of skin cancer. Note the type, location, and date of any past skin cancer
and ask about regular self-skin examination and use of sunscreen. Also ask “Has
anyone in your family had a skin cancer removed? If so, who? Do you know what
type of skin cancer—basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, or
melanoma?” Document the response even if the patient does not know which
type and counsel the patient about skin cancer prevention.

See discussion of prevention in Health
Promotion and Counseling section,
pp. 176–180.

Rashes. For complaints of rash, ask about itching, the most important
symptom when assessing rashes. Does itching precede the rash or follow the
rash? For itchy rashes, ask about seasonal allergies with itching and watery eyes,
asthma, and atopic dermatitis, often accompanied by rash on the inside of the
elbows and knees in childhood. Can the patient sleep all night or does itching
wake up the patient? For rashes, it is important to ﬁnd out what type of
moisturizer or over-the-counter products have been applied.

Causes of generalized itching, without
apparent rash, include dry skin; pregnancy; uremia; jaundice; lymphomas
and leukemia; drug reactions; and,
less commonly, polycythemia vera and
thyroid disease.

CHAPTER 6

| The Skin, Hair, and Nails

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

175

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Also, ask about dry skin, which can cause itching and rash, especially in children
with atopic dermatitis and older adults, due to loss of the natural moisture barrier in the epidermis.

Encourage use of moisturizers to
replace the lost moisture barrier.
Some recommended brands even
include sunscreen.1,2

Hair Loss or Nail Changes. Patients often report hair loss or nail changes
spontaneously. For hair loss, ask if there is hair thinning or hair shedding and, if
so, where. If shedding, does the hair come out at the roots or break along the hair
shafts? Ask about hair care practices like frequency of shampooing and use of
dyes, chemical relaxers, or heating appliances. See Table 6-11, pp. 209–210, for
normal patterns of hair loss in men and women and counsel affected patients
appropriately. Be familiar with common nail changes such as onychomycosis,
habit tic deformity, and melanonychia, shown in Table 6-12, pp. 211–212.

The most common causes of diffuse
hair thinning are male and female
pattern baldness.
Hair shedding at the roots is common in
telogen affluvium and alopecia areata.
Hair breaks along the shaft suggest
damage from hair care or tinea capitis.

Health Promotion and
Counseling: Evidence and
Recommendations
Important Topics for Health Promotion
and Counseling
●
●

Skin cancer prevention
Skin cancer screening

Skin Cancer Prevention. Clinicians play a vital role in educating patients
about skin cancer prevention. Skin cancers are the most common cancers in the
United States, affecting an estimated one in ﬁve Americans during their lifetime.3 They
are caused by a combination of genetic predisposition and ultraviolet radiation
exposure. Fair-skinned individuals are at highest risk. The most common skin cancer
is basal cell carcinoma (BCC), followed by squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), and melanoma.

For discussion and examples of types
of skin cancers, turn to the tables on
pp. 197–203.

Melanoma. Although it is the least common skin cancer, melanoma is the
most lethal due to its high rate of metastasis and high mortality at advanced
stages, causing over 70% of skin cancer deaths.4 The incidence of melanoma has
more than doubled in the past three decades, the most rapid increase of any
cancer.5 Melanoma is now the ﬁfth most frequently diagnosed cancer in men and
the seventh most frequently diagnosed in women. In the United States in 2014,
the estimated lifetime risk was 1 in 48 for whites (2%), 1 in 200 for Hispanics,
and 1 in 1,000 for African Americans.6

Ask patients about the melanoma risk factors listed below, and use of the Melanoma Risk Assessment Tool developed by the National Cancer Institute, available
at http://www.cancer.gov/melanomarisktool/. This tool assesses an individual’s
5-year risk of developing melanoma based on geographic location, gender, race,
age, history of blistering sunburns, complexion, number and size of moles,
freckling, and sun damage. It is applicable up to age 70 years, but is not intended
for patients with a family history of melanoma.
176

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

Risk Factors for Melanoma
Personal or family history of previous melanoma4,7–9
● ≥50 common moles
● Atypical or large moles, especially if dysplastic
● Red or light hair
● Solar lentigines (acquired brown macules on sun-exposed areas)
● Freckles (inherited brown macules)
● Ultraviolet radiation from heavy sun exposure, sunlamps, or tanning booths
● Light eye or skin color, especially skin that freckles or burns easily
● Severe blistering sunburns in childhood
● Immunosuppression from human immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) or from
chemotherapy
● Personal history of nonmelanoma skin cancer

●

Avoiding Ultraviolet Radiation and Tanning Beds. Increasing lifetime sun exposure correlates directly with increasing risk of skin cancer. Intermittent sun exposure appears to be more harmful than chronic exposure.9 The
best defense against skin cancers is to avoid ultraviolet radiation exposure by
limiting time in the sun, avoiding midday sun, using sunscreen, and wearing
sun-protective clothing with long sleeves and hats with wide brims. Advise
patients to avoid indoor tanning, especially children, teens, and young adults.
Use of indoor tanning beds, especially before age 35 years, increases risk of
melanoma by as much as 75%.

Signs of chronic sun damage include
numerous solar lentigines on the
shoulders and upper back, many
melanocytic nevi, solar elastosis
(yellow, thickened skin with bumps,
wrinkles, or furrowing), cutis rhomboidalis nuchae (leathery thickened skin
on the posterior neck), and actinic
purpura. See Table 6-9, Signs of Sun
Damage, on p. 206.

In 2009, the International Agency for Research on Cancer classiﬁed ultravioletemitting tanning devices as “carcinogenic to humans.”10 Options for tanning
include self-tanning products or sprays in conjunction with sunscreen. Targeted
patient messages in primary care practices have been shown to amplify these
sun-protective behaviors.11,12 The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) has made a grade B recommendation supporting behavioral counseling
through minimizing ultraviolet radiation exposure in fair-skinned children,
adolescents, and young adults aged 10 to 24 years and cites insufﬁcient evidence, grade I, for counseling adults older than 24 years, but noted no harms
associated with counseling.13
Regular Use of Sunscreen Prevents Skin Cancer. There are many
myths about sunscreen. A landmark study in 2011 demonstrated that the regular use of sunscreen decreases the incidence of melanoma.14 This well-designed
study showed that when clinicians strongly encouraged use of sunscreen,
patients were more likely to use it regularly and melanoma incidence declined.

Advise patients to use at least sun protective factor (SPF) 30 and broad-spectrum
protection (Fig. 6-4). For water exposure, patients should use water-resistant
sunscreens. New U.S. Food and Drug Administration labeling guidelines in 2011
make it easy to see these features on all bottles of sunscreen. Free information
about protection and proper use of sunscreen are available from the AAD and the
Skin Cancer Foundation.15,16

Sun
Screen
SPF 30
Broad Spectrum
Water Resistant

SPF 30 or Higher
Broad Spectrum
Water Resistant

F I G U R E 6 - 4 . Advise use of broad
spectrum sunscreen with SPF 30.

CHAPTER 6

| The Skin, Hair, and Nails

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

177

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Skin Cancer Screening. Although the USPSTF found insufﬁcient
evidence (grade I) to recommend routine skin cancer screening by primary care
physicians, it does advise clinicians to “remain alert for skin lesions with
malignant features” during routine physical examinations and reference the
ABCDE criteria.17,18 The American Cancer Society (ACS) and the AAD
recommend full-body examinations for patients over age 50 years or at high risk,
because melanoma can appear in any location.15,19 High-risk patients are those
with a personal or family history of multiple or dysplastic nevi or previous
melanoma. Patients who have a clinical skin examination within the 3 years
prior to a melanoma diagnosis have thinner melanomas than those who did
not have a clinical skin examination.20 Both new and changing nevi should be
closely examined, as at least half of melanomas arise de novo from isolated
melanocytes rather than pre-existing nevi. Also consider “opportunistic
screening” as part of the complete physical examination for patients with
signiﬁcant sun exposure and patients over age 50 years without prior skin
examination or who live alone.

Since the USPSTF review, an important German study of over 350,000 patients
reported that full-body primary care screening with dermatology referrals for
concerning lesions reduced melanoma mortality by more than 47%.21 Survival
from melanoma strongly correlates with tumor thickness. Two further studies
demonstrate that patients receiving skin examinations are more likely to have
thinner melanomas.20,22
Detecting melanoma requires practice and knowledge of how benign nevi
change over time, often going from ﬂat to raised or acquiring additional brown
pigment. Studies have shown that even limited clinician training makes a difference in detection: patients of primary care providers who spent 1.5 hours
completing an online tutorial improved diagnostic accuracy. Similar studies
show such training results in thinner melanomas than patients of providers
without such training.23–26

Turn to Tables 6-4 through 6-6 on
pp. 197–203 showing rough, pink,
and brown nevi and their mimics.

Screening for Melanoma: The ABCDEs. Clinicians should apply the
ABCE-EFG method when screening moles for melanoma (this does not apply
for non-melanocytic lesions like seborrheic keratoses). The sensitivity of this
tool for detecting melanoma ranges from 43% to 97%, and speciﬁcity ranges
from 36% to 100%; diagnostic accuracy depends on how many criteria are used
to deﬁne abnormality.27 If two or more of these features are present, biopsy
should be considered. The most sensitive is E, for evolution or change. Pay close
attention to nevi that have changed rapidly based on objective evidence.

Review the ABCDE-EFG rule and photographs in Table 6-6, pp. 200–203,
which provide additional helpful
identifiers and comparisons of benign
brown lesions with melanoma.

The ABCDE Rule
The ABCDE method has been used for many years to teach clinicians and
patients about features suspicious for melanoma. If two or more of these are
present, risk of melanoma increases and biopsy should be considered. Some
have suggested adding EFG to help detect aggressive nodular melanomas.
(continued )

178

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

The ABCDE Rule (continued )
Melanoma

Benign Nevus

Asymmetry
Of one side of mole
compared to the
other

Border irregularity
Especially if ragged,
notched, or blurred

Color variations
More than two colors,
especially blue-black,
white (loss of pigment
due to regression), or
red (inﬂammatory
reaction to abnormal
cells)

With the exception of a homogenous
blue color in a blue nevus, blue or
black color within a larger pigmented
lesion is especially concerning for
melanoma.

Diameter >6 mm
Approximately the
size of a pencil eraser

Early melanomas may be <6 mm, and
many benign lesions are >6 mm.

(continued )

CHAPTER 6

| The Skin, Hair, and Nails

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

179

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

The ABCDE Rule (continued )
Melanoma

Benign Nevus

Evolving
Or changing rapidly in
size, symptoms, or
morphology

Evolution, or change, is the most sensitive of these criteria. A reliable history of change may prompt biopsy of
a benign-appearing lesion.

Elevated
Firm to palpation
● Growing progressively over several weeks
●
●

Patient Screening: The Self Skin Examination. The AAD and the
ACS recommend regular self-skin examination based on expert opinion.15,28
Instruct patients with risk factors for skin cancer and melanoma, especially
those with a history of high sun exposure, prior or family history of melanoma,
and ≥50 moles or >5 to 10 atypical moles, to perform regular self-skin examinations. Patients who examine their skin regularly are more likely to have
thinner melanomas, if detected.24,29 Teach patients about the appearance of
different skin cancers, making use of the excellent resources available on the
internet.15

See Patient Instructions for Self Skin
Examination, pp. 187–188.

Approximately half of melanomas are
initially detected by patients or their
partners.

Techniques of Examination
Full-Body and Integrated Skin Examinations
Perform a full-body skin examination in the context of the overall physical examination. Some patients at risk for melanoma, especially men over age 50 years,
may not request this examination, so the general physical examination is an
important opportunity to look for melanomas and other skin cancers, especially
in areas patients ﬁnd hard to see such as the back and posterior legs.
Inspect and palpate all skin lesions, focusing on key features that help distinguish if lesions are benign or suspicious for malignancy. Are they raised,
flat, or fluid-filled? Are they rough or smooth? What about color? Is the lesion
pink or brown? Measure the size. Is the size changing? Learn to describe each
lesion accurately, using the terminology speciﬁed below. Changing moles, a
history of skin cancer, and other risk factors all warrant a full-body skin
examination.

180

See Tables 6-1 and 6-2 for examples
and descriptions of primary skin
lesions including flat, raised, fluidfilled, pustules, furuncles, nodules,
cysts, wheals, and burrows (pp. 191–
195); Table 6-3 for a safari of benign
lesions (p. 196); and Tables 6-4 to 6-6
for rough, pink, and brown lesions
and their mimics (pp. 197–203).

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Even during routine examinations, you can pursue an integrated skin examination
as you examine sun-exposed areas that are already easily accessible.
■ When examining the head and neck, remember to inspect closely for skin

cancers as well as common benign lesions such as acne, which can become
scarring.
■ Look at the arms and hands for sun damage, actinic keratoses, and SCCs, as

well as normal ﬁndings. Educate the patient about such ﬁndings as solar
lentigines and seborrheic keratoses.
■ When listening to the lungs, remove the shirt or open the gown and fully

inspect the back for normal moles versus possible melanomas. Think about
this approach throughout the physical examination. Note any vascular or
purpuric lesions, petechiae, or eccymoses.
Integrating the skin examination into the physical examination and routinely
recording your ﬁndings as part of the general write-up saves time and contributes to earlier detection of skin cancers, when they are easier to treat. Begin
implementing this approach early in your training on each patient you examine,
whether outpatient or inpatient. Instead of documenting what is not present on
the skin, document what is present. This is the best way to learn to distinguish
normal skin lesions from abnormal lesions and potential skin cancers. Systemic
illnesses also have many associated skin ﬁndings.

See Tables 6-7, Acne Vulgaris: Primary
and Secondary Lesions, p. 204.

See Table 6-9, Signs of Sun Damage,
p. 206.

See Risk Factors for Melanoma
on p. 177.
See Table 6-8, Vascular and Purpuric
Lesions of the Skin, p. 205.

See Table 6-10, Systemic Illnesses and
Associated Skin Findings, pp. 207–208.

Preparing for the Examination
Lighting, Equipment, and Dermoscopy. Make sure there is
adequate lighting. Good overhead ambient lighting or natural light from
windows is usually adequate. You may wish to add a strong light source if the
room is dark.

You will also need a small ruler or tape measure; these can often be obtained
from packets containing disposable marking pens. In addition, a small magnifying glass allows you to examine lesions more closely. These tools help you
document important features of skin lesions, such as size, shape, color, and
texture.
Dermoscopy is an increasingly useful ofﬁce practice for deciding whether a
melanocytic lesion is benign or malignant. This handheld device provides
cross-polarized or unpolarized light to visualize patterns of pigmentation or
vascular structures. With adequate clinician training, use of dermoscopy
improves the sensitivity and speciﬁcity of differentiating melanomas from
benign lesions.24,30

CHAPTER 6

| The Skin, Hair, and Nails

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

181

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
The Patient Gown. Ask the
patient to change into a gown with
the opening in the back and clothes
removed except for underwear (Fig.
6-5). This is the ﬁrst requirement for
the skin examination. Ask if the
patient would like to have a chaperone
present, especially when examination
of the genital areas is anticipated.
F I G U R E 6 - 5 . The patient gown
should open in the back.

Handwashing. Before beginning the examination, cleanse your hands
thoroughly. It is important for you to palpate lesions for texture, ﬁrmness, and
scaliness. Because frequent handwashing increases the risk of irritant contact
dermatitis, dermatologists recommend using hand sanitizers, which are less
drying than soap and water. Explain that cleansing your hands ensures
hygiene and an optimal examination. It is best to restrict use of gloves to
touching wounds rather than throughout the examination so that the patient
feels accepted. The power of professional and caring human touch can be
therapeutic, especially for patients with stigmatizing diseases like psoriasis
and HIV.

The Skin Examination
Important Terms for Describing Skin Lesions. It is important to
use speciﬁc terminology to describe skin lesions and rashes. Good descriptions
include each of the following elements: number, size, color, shape, texture,
primary lesion, location, and conﬁguration.

For example, for seborrheic keratosis, examine and record: “Multiple 5 mm to
2 cm tan to brown oval stuck-on ﬂat-topped verrucous plaques on the back and
abdomen, following skin tension lines.” Note the description of each element:
number, multiple; size, 5 mm–2 cm; color, tan to brown; shape, oval; texture, ﬂattopped verrucous; location, on the back and abdomen; and conﬁguration, following skin tension lines.

Describing Skin Findings
●

Primary lesion: Primary lesions are ﬂat or raised.
● Flat: You cannot palpate the lesion with your eyes closed.
● Macule: Lesion is ﬂat and <1 cm.
● Patch: Lesion is ﬂat and >1 cm.
● Raised: You can palpate the lesion with eyes closed.
● Papule: Lesion is raised, <1 cm, and not ﬂuid ﬁlled.
● Plaque: Lesion is raised, >1 cm, but not ﬂuid ﬁlled.
(continued )

182

See Table 6-1, Describing Primary Skin
Lesions: Flat, Raised, and Fluid-filled,
pp. 191–193; Table 6-2, Additional
Primary Lesions: Pustules, Furuncles,
Nodules, Cysts, Wheals, Burrows,
pp. 194–195; and Table 6-3, Dermatology Safari: Benign Skin Lesions,
p. 196.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

Describing Skin Findings (continued )
Vesicle: Lesion is raised, <1 cm, and ﬁlled with ﬂuid.
Bulla: Lesion is raised, >1 cm, and ﬂuid ﬁlled.
● Other primary lesions include erosions, ulcers, nodules, ecchymoses,
petechiae, and palpable purpura.
● Number: Lesions can be solitary or multiple. If multiple, record how many. Also
consider estimating the total number of the type of lesion you are describing.
● Size: Measure with a ruler in millimeters or centimeters. For oval lesions,
measure in the long axis, then perpendicular to the axis.
● Shape: Some good words to learn are “circular,” “oval,” “annular” (ring-like,
with central clearing), “nummular” (coin-like, no central clearing), and
“polygonal.”
● Color: Use your imagination and be creative. Refer to a color wheel, if needed.
There are many shades of tan and brown, but start with tan, light brown, and
dark brown if you are having trouble.
●
●

Use “skin-colored” to describe a lesion that is the same shade as the
patient’s skin.
● For red lesions or rashes, blanch the lesion by pressing it ﬁrmly with your
ﬁnger or a glass slide to see if the redness temporarily lightens then reﬁlls.
●

●

Texture: Palpate the lesion to see if it is smooth, ﬂeshy, verrucous or warty, or
scaly (ﬁne, keratotic, or greasy scale).

Location: Be as speciﬁc as possible. For single lesions, measure their distance
from other landmarks (e.g., 1 cm lateral to left oral commissure).
● Conﬁguration: Although not always necessary, describing patterns is often
very helpful.

Blanching lesions are erythematous
and suggest inflammation. Nonblanching lesions such as petechiae,
purpura, and vascular structures
(cherry angiomas, vascular malformations) are not erythematous, but rather
bright red, purple, or violaceous. See
Table 6-8, Vascular and Purpuric
Lesions of the Skin, p. 205.
Scaling can be greasy, like seborrheic dermatitis or seborrheic keratoses, dry and fine like tinea pedis,
or hard and keratotic like actinic
keratoses or SCC.

●

For more information and additional illustrations of each of these elements,
LearnDerm is a free and very helpful website.31

Examples are herpes zoster with unilateral
and dermatomal vesicles; herpes simplex,
with grouped vesicles or pustules on an
erythematous base; tinea pedis with
annular lesions; and poison ivy allergic
contact dermatitis with linear lesions.

Techniques of Examination—Patient Seated. Choose one of two
patient positions for performing the full-body skin examination. The patient can
be seated or can lie supine, then prone. Plan to examine the skin in the same order
every time, so you are less likely to skip part of the examination.

CHAPTER 6

| The Skin, Hair, and Nails

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

183

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

With the patient seated on the examining table, stand in front of the patient and
adjust the table to a comfortable height. Start by examining the hair and scalp
(Fig. 6-6). Separate the hair to examine the scalp from one side to the other. You
may need to use your ﬁngers or a cotton-tipped applicator (“Q-tip”) to separate
the hair to see the scalp (Fig. 6-7). Note the distribution, texture, and quantity
of hair. Remember to inspect the ears.

Alopecia, or hair loss, can be diffuse,
patchy, or total. Male and female pattern hair loss are normal with aging.
Focal patches may be lost suddenly in
alopecia areata. Refer scarring alopecia to a dermatologist.
Sparse hair is seen in hypothyroidism;
fine, silky hair in hyperthyroidism. See
Table 6-11, Hair Loss, pp. 209–210.

F I G U R E 6 - 6 . Part the hair on
the scalp.

F I G U R E 6 - 7 . Use ﬁngers or
an applicator to better visualize
the scalp.

Now inspect the head and neck, including the forehead; eyes including eyelids,
conjunctivae, sclerae, eyelashes, and eyebrows; nose, cheeks, lips, oral cavity,
and chin; and anterior neck (Figs. 6-8 to 6-10).

FIGURE 6-8.
the forehead.

Inspect

F I G U R E 6 - 9 . Inspect
the face, eyes, and ears.

Look for signs of BCC on the face. See
Table 6-5, Pink Lesions: Basal Cell
Carcinoma and Its Mimics, pp. 198–199.

F I G U R E 6 - 1 0 . Inspect
the anterior neck.

Move the gown to see each area. Ask permission ﬁrst
by saying, “I’d like to separate the gown to look at
your back now. Is that okay?” (Fig. 6-11). Do this for
every part of the body.

F I G U R E 6 - 1 1 . Inspect
the back.

184

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Now inspect the shoulders, arms, and hands (Fig. 6-12). Inspect and palpate the
ﬁngernails (Fig. 6-13). Note their color, shape, and any lesions. Longitudinal
bands of pigment are normal in people with darker skin.

See Table 6-12, Findings In or Near the
Nails, pp. 211–212.

FIGURE 6-12.

Inspect the arms.

FIGURE 6-13.
the ﬁngernails.

Inspect and palpate

Now inspect the chest and abdomen (Fig. 6-14), preparing the patient by saying,
“Let’s look at your upper chest and then your stomach area.” The patient will
generally help by lowering or raising the gown to expose these areas and covering up when you are ﬁnished (Fig. 6-15).

FIGURE 6-14.

Inspect the chest.

F I G U R E 6 - 1 5 . Inspect the abdomen.

Now let the patient know that you will be inspecting the thighs and lower legs
(Fig. 6-16). You and the patient can work together to expose the skin in these
areas, moving down to the feet and toes (Fig. 6-17). Inspect and palpate the
toenails, and inspect the soles and between the toes (Figs. 6-18 and 6-19).

FIGURE 6-16.

Inspect the thighs.

F I G U R E 6 - 1 7 . Inspect the lower legs.

CHAPTER 6

| The Skin, Hair, and Nails

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

185

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

FIGURE 6-18.
the feet.

Inspect the soles of

FIGURE 6-19.
toes.

Inspect between the

Now ask the patient to stand so that you inspect the lower back and posterior legs
(Figs. 6-20 and 6-21). If needed, ask the patient to uncover the buttocks
(Fig. 6-22). Examination of the breasts and genitalia may be saved for last. These
examinations are described in other chapters. Remember to consider patient
comfort, modesty, and use of a chaperone during these examinations.

F I G U R E 6 - 2 0 . Inspect
the back.

F I G U R E 6 - 2 1 . Inspect
the posterior legs.

See Chapter 10, Breasts and Axillae,
pp. 419–447; Chapter 13, Male Genitalia, pp. 541–563; and Chapter 14,
Female Genitalia, pp. 565–606.

F I G U R E 6 - 2 2 . Inspect
the buttocks.

Techniques of Examination—Patient Supine and Prone. Some
clinicians prefer this positioning for more thorough examinations, although
patients may feel it is more “clinical.” Practice and feedback from patients will
give you a sense of patient preferences.

Start with the patient supine, lying ﬂat on the examination table. As with the
seated position, start by inspecting the scalp, face, and anterior neck (Fig. 6-23).
Next, move to the shoulders, arms, and hands (Fig. 6-24); then to the chest and

FIGURE 6-23.

186

Inspect the scalp.

FIGURE 6-24.

Inspect the hands.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

FIGURE 6-25.

Inspect the chest.

FIGURE 6-26.
thighs.

Inspect the anterior

abdomen (Fig. 6-25); anterior thighs (Fig. 6-26); and lower legs, feet, and, if appropriate, the genitalia. As noted previously, ask permission when moving the gown
to expose different areas, and let the patient know which areas you will be examining next so the patient feels more involved in the examination.
Now ask the patient to turn over to the prone position, lying face down. Look at
the posterior scalp, posterior neck, back, posterior thighs, legs, soles of the feet, and
buttocks (if appropriate).

Special Techniques
Patient Instructions for the Self Skin-Examination. The AAD
recommends regular self-examination of the skin using the techniques illustrated.
The patient will need a full-length mirror, a hand-held mirror, and a well-lit room
that provides privacy. Teach the patient the ABCDE-EFG method for assessing
moles. Help them to identify melanomas by looking at photographs of benign and
malignant nevi on easy-to-access websites, handouts, or tables in this chapter.

Review the ABCDE-EFG criteria
on pp. 178–180.

Patient Instructions for Skin
Self-Examination

Examine your body front and back in
the mirror, then look at your right
and left sides with arms raised.

Bend elbows and look carefully at
forearms, upper underarms, and
palms.
(continued )

CHAPTER 6

| The Skin, Hair, and Nails

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

187

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

Patient Instructions for Skin
Self-Examination (continued )

Look at the backs of your legs and
feet, the spaces between your toes,
and the soles.

Examine the back of your neck and
scalp with a hand mirror. Part hair for
a closer look.

Finally, check your back and buttocks
with a hand mirror.
Source: Adapted from American Academy of Dermatology. How to perform a self-exam. Available at
https://www.aad.org/spot-skin-cancer/understanding-skin-cancer/how-do-i-check-my-skin/how-toperform-a-self-exam. Accessed February 12, 2015.

Examining the Patient with Hair
Loss. Based on the patient’s history, start
by examining the hair to determine the overall pattern of hair loss or hair thinning.32
Inspect the scalp for erythema, scaling, pustules, tenderness, bogginess, and scarring.
Look at the width of the hair part in various
sections of the scalp. To examine the hair for
shedding from the roots, perform a hair pull
test by gently grasping 50 to 60 hairs with
your thumb and index and middle ﬁngers,
pulling ﬁrmly away from the scalp (Fig.
6-27). If all the hairs have telogen bulbs, the
most likely diagnosis is telogen efﬂuvium. To
examine the hair for fragility, perform the tug
test by holding a group of hairs in one hand,
pulling along the hair shafts with the other
(Fig. 6-28); if any hairs break, it is abnormal.
188

FIGURE 6-27.

Hair pull test.

FIGURE 6-28.

Tug test.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Most (97%) hair loss is nonscarring, but any scarring, namely shiny spots without any hair follicles on close examination with a magnifying glass, should
prompt referral to dermatology for scalp biopsy.

Possible internal causes of diffuse
nonscarring hair shedding in young
women are iron-deficiency anemia
and hyper- or hypothyroidism.

Evaluating the Bedbound Patient. People conﬁned to bed, especially
when they are emaciated, elderly, or neurologically impaired, are particularly
susceptible to skin damage and ulceration. Pressure sores result from sustained
compression that obliterates arteriolar and capillary blood ﬂow to the skin, and
from shear forces created by body movements. When a person slides down in
bed from a partially sitting position, for example, or is dragged rather than lifted
up after being supine, rough movement can distort the soft tissues of the buttocks
and close off the arteries and arterioles. Friction and moisture further increase
the risk of abrasions and sores.

Assess every susceptible patient by carefully inspecting the skin that overlies the
sacrum, buttocks, greater trochanters, knees, and heels. Roll the patient onto one
side to see the low back and gluteal area best.

See Table 6-13, Pressure Ulcers, p. 213.

Local redness of the skin warns of
impending necrosis, although some
deep pressure sores develop without
antecedent redness. Inspect closely
for skin breaks and ulcers.

Recording Your Findings
Note that initially you may use sentences to describe your ﬁndings; later you will
use phrases. The examples below contain phrases appropriate for most write-ups.

For more details about this terminology,
turn to Techniques of Examination,
pp. 182–183.

As stated on p. 182, use speciﬁc terms to describe skin lesions and rashes,
including:
■ Number—solitary or multiple; estimate of total number
■ Size—measured in millimeters or centimeters
■ Color—including erythematous if blanching; if nonblanching, vascular-like

cherry angiomas and vascular malformations, petechiae, or purpura
■ Shape—circular, oval, annular, nummular, or polygonal
■ Texture—smooth, ﬂeshy, verrucous or warty, keratotic; greasy if scaling
■ Primary lesion—ﬂat, a macule or patch; raised, a papule or plaque; or ﬂuid

ﬁlled, a vesicle or bulla (may also be erosions, ulcers, nodules, ecchymoses,
petechiae, and palpable purpura)
■ Location—including measured distance from other landmarks
■ Conﬁguration—grouped, annular, linear

CHAPTER 6

| The Skin, Hair, and Nails

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

189

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Recording the Skin, Hair, and Nails
Physical Examination
“Skin warm and dry. Nails without clubbing or cyanosis. Approximately 20
brown, round macules on upper back, chest, and arms, are all symmetric in
pigmentation, none suspicious. No rash, petechiae, or ecchymoses.”
OR
“Marked facial pallor, and circumoral cyanosis. Palms cold and moist. Cyanosis in nail beds of ﬁngers and toes. Numerous palpable purpura on lower legs
bilaterally.”
OR
“Scattered stuck-on verrucous plaques on back and abdomen. Over 30 small
round brown macules with symmetric pigmentation on back, chest, and arms.
Single 1.2 × 1.6 cm asymmetric dark brown and black plaque with erythematous,
uneven border, on left upper arm.”
OR
“Facial plethora. Skin icteric. Many telangiectatic mats on chest and abdomen.
Single 5 mm pearly papule with rolled border on left zygomatic cheek. Nails
with clubbing but no cyanosis.”

190

There are normal nevi and perfusion
without any rashes or suspicious
lesions.
These findings suggest central cyanosis and vasculitis.

These findings suggest normal seborrheic keratoses and benign nevi, but
also a possible malignant melanoma.

These findings suggest probable endstage liver disease and incidental BCC.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 6-1 Describing
Primary Skin Lesions: Flat,
Raised, and Fluid-Filled

Describe skin lesions accurately, including number, size, color, texture, shape, primary lesion, location, and conﬁguration. This
table identiﬁes common primary skin lesions and includes classic descriptions of each lesion with the diagnosis in italics.

Flat Spots
If you run your ﬁnger over the lesion but do not feel the lesion, the lesion is ﬂat. If a ﬂat spot is small (<1 cm), it is a
macule. If a ﬂat spot is larger (>1 cm), it is a patch.

Macules (ﬂat, small)

Multiple 3–8-mm erythematous
conﬂuent round macules on chest,
back, and arms; morbilliform drug
eruption

Multiple 2–5-mm hypopigmented, hyperpigmented, or tan round to oval macules on
upper neck and back, upper chest, and arms with slight inducible scale on scraping
(tinea versicolor)

Multiple scattered 2–4-mm round
and oval brown macules,
symmetrically pigmented, on back
and chest with reticular pattern on
dermoscopy; benign melanocytic nevi

Solitary 6-mm dark brown round symmetric
macule on upper back; benign melanocytic
nevus

Solitary dark brown, blue-gray, and red
7-mm macule with irregular borders
and ﬁngerlike projections of pigment,
on right forearm; malignant melanoma

Large conﬂuent completely depigmented
patches on dorsal hands and distal forearms;
vitiligo

Bilateral erythematous, geographic
patches with peripheral scaling, on
inner thighs bilaterally, sparing the
scrotum; tinea cruris
(continued)

Patches (ﬂat, large)

Bilaterally symmetric erythematous
patches on central cheeks and
eyebrows, some with overlying
greasy scale; seborrheic dermatitis

CHAPTER 6

| The Skin, Hair, and Nails

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

191

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 6-1 Describing
Primary Skin Lesions: Flat,
Raised, and Fluid-Filled (Continued )

Raised Spots
If you run your ﬁnger over the lesion and it is palpable above the skin, it is raised. If a raised spot is small (<1 cm), it is a
papule. If a raised spot is larger (>1 cm), it is a plaque.

Papules (raised, small)

Solitary 7-mm oval pink pearly papule with
overlying telangiectasias on right nasojugal fold;
basal cell carcinoma

Multiple 2–4-mm soft, ﬂeshy skin-colored to
light brown papules on lateral neck and axillae
in skin folds; skin tags

Multiple 3–5-mm pink ﬁrm smooth domed
papules with central umbillications, in mons
pubis, and on penile shaft; molluscum contagiosum

Scattered erythematous round drop-like, ﬂattopped well-circumscribed scaling papules and
plaques on trunk; guttate psoriasis

Plaques (raised, large)

Scattered erythematous to bright
pink well-circumscribed ﬂat-topped
plaques on extensor knees and
elbows, with overlying silvery scale;
plaque psoriasis

192

Bilateral erythematous, licheniﬁed (thickened
from rubbing) poorly circumscribed plaques
on ﬂexor wrists, antecubital fossae, and popliteal fossae; atopic dermatitis

Single, oval, ﬂat-topped superﬁcial
erythematous to skin-colored plaque on
right abdomen; herald patch of pityriasis
rosea

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Multiple round to oval scaling
violaceous plaques on abdomen and
back; pityriasis rosea

Multiple round coin-like eczematous
plaques on arms, legs, and abdomen, with
overlying dried transudate crust; nummular
dermatitis

Fluid-ﬁlled Lesions
If the lesion is raised, ﬁlled with ﬂuid, and small (<1 cm), it is a vesicle. If a ﬂuid-ﬁlled spot is larger (>1 cm), it is a bulla.

Vesicles (ﬂuid-ﬁlled, small)

Grouped 2–5-mm vesicles on erythematous
base on left upper abdomen and trunk in a
dermatomal distribution that does not cross
the midline; herpes zoster or “shingles”

Scattered 2–5-mm erythematous papules
and vesicles with transudate crust, some
with linear arrays, on forearms, neck, and
abdomen; rhus dermatitis or allergic
contact dermatitis from poison ivy

Solitary 8-cm dusky oval patch with
Several tense bullae on lower legs; insect bites
smaller inner violaceous patch and
central 3.5-cm tense bulla, on right
posterior lower back; bullous ﬁxed drug
eruption

Many vesicles and tense bullae up to
4 cm, some having unroofed and left large
(4-cm) erosions, on lower legs bilaterally
up to the line of the top of combat boots;
an inherited skin fragility disorder

Multiple 2–4-mm vesicles and
pustules on erythematous base,
grouped together on left neck; herpes
simplex virus

Bullae (ﬂuid-ﬁlled, large)

CHAPTER 6

| The Skin, Hair, and Nails

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

193

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 6-2 Additional
Primary Lesions: Pustules, Furuncles,
Nodules, Cysts, Wheals, Burrows

Pustule: Small palpable collection of neutrophils or keratin that appears white

∼15–20 pustules and acneiform papules on buccal
and parotid cheeks bilaterally; acne vulgaris

∼30 2–5-mm erythematous papules and
pustules on frontal, temporal, and parietal
scalp; bacterial folliculitis

Furuncle: Inﬂamed hair follicle; multiple furuncles together form a carbuncle

Two large (2-cm) furuncles on forehead,
without ﬂuctuance; furunculosis (Note:
ﬂuctuant deep infections are abscesses)

Nodule: Larger and deeper than a papule

Solitary blue-brown 1.2-cm ﬁrm nodule with positive
dimple sign and hyperpigmented rim on left lateral
thigh; dermatoﬁbroma

194

Solitary 4-cm pink and brown scar-like
nodule on central chest at site of previous
trauma; keloid

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 3.1 Motivational Interviewing: A Clinical Example
Subcutaneous mass/cyst: Whether mobile or ﬁxed, cysts are encapsulated collections of ﬂuid or semisolid

Solitary 2-cm tethered subcutaneous cyst with overlying punctum
releasing caseous whitish yellow
substance with foul odor; epidermal inclusion cyst

Three 6–8-mm mobile subcutaneous cysts on vertex
scalp, that on excision reveal pearly white balls; pilar
cysts

Wheal: Area of localized dermal
edema that evanesces (comes and
goes) within a period of 1–2 days;
this is the essential primary lesion
of urticaria

Burrow: Small linear or serpiginous pathways in the
epidermis created by the scabies mite

Many variably sized (1–10-cm)
wheals on lateral neck, shoulders,
abdomen, arms, and legs; urticaria

Multiple small (3–6-mm) erythematous papules on
abdomen, buttocks, scrotum, and shaft and head of
penis, with four burrows noted on interdigital web
spaces; scabies

CHAPTER 6

Solitary 9-cm mobile rubbery
subcutaneous mass on left
temple; lipoma

| The Skin, Hair, and Nails

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

195

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 6-3 Dermatology Safari: Benign Lesions
Practice makes perfect . . . Look for these common lesions during your clinical rotations. Perform a skin examination on as many
patients as you can. If you are unsure about identifying the lesion, ask your instructors or attending physicians for help.

Cherry angiomas

Seborrheic keratosis

Solar lentigines

Benign melanocytic nevi

Dermatoﬁbroma

Keloids

Epidermal inclusion cyst

Pilar cyst

Lipoma

196

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 6-4 Rough
Lesions: Actinic Keratoses, Squamous
Cell Carcinoma,
and Their Mimics
Table 3.1 Motivational
Interviewing:
A Clinical Example
Patients commonly report feeling rough lesions. Many are benign, like seborrheic keratoses or warts, but squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC) and its precursor actinic keratosis can also feel rough or keratotic. SCC most commonly arises on sun-damaged skin of the
head, neck, and dorsal arms and hands and can metastasize if left untreated. It consists of more mature cells usually resembling
the spinous layer of the epidermis and accounts for ∼16% of skin cancers. If left untreated, actinic keratoses progress to SCC at a
rate of about 1 in 1,000 per year. Counsel affected patients about sun avoidance and use of sunscreen and offer treatment to
prevent progression to SCC.

Actinic Keratosis and
Squamous Cell Carcinoma

Mimics

Actinic keratosis

Superﬁcial xerosis or seborrheic dermatitis

Actinic keratosis after ﬁeld therapy with 5-ﬂuorouracil
(left photo)
■ Often easier to feel than to see
■ Superﬁcial keratotic papules “come and go” on sun-damaged skin

■

Cutaneous horn/keratotic scale

Warts

■

The protypic keratotic scale of actinic keratoses and SCC is
formed by keratin and can result in a cutaneous horn
■ Cutaneous horns should generally be biopsied to rule out SCC

■

Squamous cell carcinoma

Seborrheic keratosis

Keratoacanthomas are SCCs that arise rapidly and have a
crateriform center
■ Often have a smooth but ﬁrm border
■ SCCs can become quite large if left untreated (Note: highest
sites of metastasis are the scalp, lips, and ears)

■

■

■

■

May occur in same distribution on forehead, central face
Scale is less keratotic and will improve with moisturizers,
mild topical steroids

Usually skin-colored to pink, texture more verrucous than
keratotic
■ May be ﬁliform
■ Often have hemorrhagic punctae that can be seen with a
magnifying glass or dermatoscope

Often have a verrucous texture
Appear like a “stuck-on” or ﬂattened ball of wax
■ May crumble or bleed if picked
■ Speciﬁc features on dermoscopy such as milia-like cysts or
comedone-like openings are reassuring, if present
■ May be erythematous if inﬂamed
■

CHAPTER 6

| The Skin, Hair, and Nails

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

197

Table 6-5 Pinkhttp://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Lesions: Basal Cell Carcinoma
and Its Mimics

Basal cell carcinoma (BCC) is the most common cancer in the world. Fortunately, it rarely spreads to other parts of the body.
Nonetheless, it can invade and destroy local tissues, causing signiﬁcant morbidity to the eye, nose, or brain. BCC consists of
immature cells similar to those in the basal layer of the epidermis, and account for roughly 80% of all skin cancers. BCCs should
be biopsied for conﬁrmation before treatment. Review the BCC features below and how they contrast with mimics that are benign.

Basal Cell Carcinomas

Mimics

Superﬁcial basal cell carcinoma

Actinic keratosis and squamous
cell carcinoma in situ

■
■

Pink patch that does not heal
May have focal scaling

■

Actinic keratosis or squamous cell carcinoma in situ usually
has keratotic scaling

Nodular basal cell carcinoma

Sebaceous hyperplasia

Pink papule, often with translucent or pearly appearance
and overlying telangiectasias
■ May have focal pigmentation
■ Dermoscopy shows arborizing vessels, focal pigment
globules, and other speciﬁc patterns

■

■

198

Yellowish globular papules, often with central dell, on
forehead and cheeks
■ Dermoscopy shows telangiectasias that go around sebaceous
glands rather than over them as in BCC

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 3.1 Motivational Interviewing: A Clinical Example
Basal Cell Carcinomas

Mimics

Nodular basal cell carcinoma (continued)

Fibrous papule

■

1 cm pearly pink plaque with central depression and
overlying arborizing telangiectasias on nasal ala

Ulcerated basal cell carcinoma

■

Non-healing ulcer, resulting in “rolled border”

Skin-colored to pink papule on the nose, without
telangiectasias
■ May become excoriated
■

Squamous cell carcinoma

■
■

May also be ulcerated
Firmer at edges than BCC

CHAPTER 6

| The Skin, Hair, and Nails

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

199

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 6-6 Brown
Lesions:
Melanoma and Its Mimics

Most patients have brown spots on their body surface if you look thoroughly. Although these are usually freckles, benign nevi,
solar lentigines, or seborrheic keratoses, you and the patient must look closely for any that stand out as a possible melanoma. The
best way to detect a melanoma is to do numerous skin examinations so that you recognize brown lesions that are benign. With
enough practice, when you see a melanoma, it will stick out as the “ugly duckling.” Review the ABCDE rule and photographs on
pp. 178–180, which provide additional helpful identiﬁers and comparisons.

Melanomas

Mimics

Amelanotic melanoma

Skin tags or intradermal nevi

■
■

Usually in very fair-skinned people
Evolution or rapid change is the most important feature,
because variegation or dark pigment is missing in this type

Melanoma in situ

■
■

■

Solar lentigo

On sun-exposed or sun-protected skin
Look for ABCDE features

200

Soft and ﬂeshy
Often around neck, axillae, or back
■ Sessile nevi may have a hint of brown pigmentation
■

■
■

On sun-exposed skin
Light brown and uniform in color but may be asymmetric

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 3.1 Motivational Interviewing: A Clinical Example
Melanomas

Mimics

Melanoma

Dysplastic nevus

■
■

May arise de novo or in existing nevi and exhibits ABCDEs
Patients with many dysplastic nevi have increased risk of
melanoma

Melanoma

■
■

Inﬂamed seborrheic keratosis

May have variegated color (browns, red)
Has melanocytic features on dermoscopy

Melanoma

■

May have macular base and papular central “fried egg”
component
■ Compare to the patient’s other nevi and monitor changes
■

Can sometimes mimic a melanoma if it has an
erythematous base
■ Dermoscopy helps the trained eye distinguish these
■

Seborrheic keratosis

May be uniform in color but asymmetric; key feature is
rapid change or Evolution

■

Stuck-on and verrucous, may be darkly pigmented
(continued)

CHAPTER 6

| The Skin, Hair, and Nails

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

201

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 6-6 Brown
Lesions:

Melanoma and Its Mimics (Continued )

Melanomas

Mimics

Acral melanoma

Acral nevus

■
■

Rapid change or evolution helps detect acral melanoma
Consider biopsies if >7 mm, rapidly growing, or concerning
features on dermoscopy

Melanoma with blue-black areas

■

Blue-black areas are concerning for melanoma, especially if
they are asymmetric

202

■

Likely benign if <7 mm and has a reassurance pattern on
dermoscopy, such as the parallel furrow or lattice patterns

Blue nevus

■

Blue nevi have a homogenous blue-gray appearance,
clinically and on dermoscopy

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 3.1 Motivational Interviewing: A Clinical Example
Finding the Ugly Duckling: As you evaluate changing brown lesions in the context of the patient’s other nevi and lentigines,
the “ugly duckling” is the nevus that looks different from the patient’s other nevi. A patient may make many atypical nevi with
surrounding macular components and central papular components, but they all look the same. Find the patient’s signature nevus,
then search for the ugly duckling that looks different from the patient’s typical “signature” nevi.
Most dermatologists now rely on a dermatoscope to evaluate pigmented lesions, which allows them to detect melanomas when
they are thinner. With training, dermoscopy can help distinguish nevi with reassuring patterns from possible early melanomas.
Even without dermoscopy, however, a keen eye actively inspecting the skin for “ugly ducklings” is likely to detect melanomas
when they arise.

This patient has multiple atypical nevi, but the one on his right back just lateral to midline stands out as the “ugly duckling”
because it has three colors; the white area showed melanoma in situ on biopsy.

CHAPTER 6

| The Skin, Hair, and Nails

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

203

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 6-7 Acne Vulgaris—Primary and Secondary Lesions
Acne vulgaris is the most common cutaneous disorder in the United States, affecting more than 85% of adolescents.33 Acne is a
disorder of the pilosebaceous unit that involves proliferation of the keratinocytes at the opening of the follicle; increased
production of sebum, stimulated by androgens, which combines with keratinocytes to plug the follicular opening; growth of
Propionibacterium acnes, an anaerobic diphtheroid normally found on the skin; and inﬂammation from bacterial activity and
release of free fatty acids and enzymes from activated neutrophils. Cosmetics, humidity, heavy sweating, and stress are
contributing factors. Most recommendations for treatment of acne are divided along its morphologic subdivisions: comedonal
(mild), inﬂammatory (moderate), and nodulocystic (severe).
Lesions appear in areas with the greatest number of sebaceous glands, namely the face, neck, chest, upper back, and upper
arms. They may be primary, secondary, or mixed.

Primary Lesions

Secondary Lesions

Mild Acne: Open and closed comedones,
occasional papules

Acne with Pitting and Scars

Moderate Acne: Comedones, papules,
pustules

Severe Cystic Acne

204

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 6-8 Vascular
and Purpuric Lesions
Table 3.1 Motivational
of the Skin Interviewing: A Clinical Example
Vascular Lesions
Spider Angiomaa

Color and Size
Shape

Pulsatility and Effect
of Pressure

Distribution
Signiﬁcance

Spider Veina

Cherry Angioma

Fiery red; from very small to
Bluish; size variable, from
2 cm
very small to several inches
Central body, sometimes
Variable; may resemble a
raised, surrounded by
spider or be linear, irregular,
erythema and radiating legs
cascading
Often seen in center of the spider Absent; pressure over the
when pressure with a glass slide
center does not cause
is applied; pressure on the body
blanching, but diffuse
causes blanching of the spider
pressure blanches the veins
Face, neck, arms, and upper trunk; Most often on the legs, near
almost never below the waist
veins; also on the anterior chest
Single spider angiomas are
Often accompanies increased
normal and are common on the pressure in the superﬁcial
face and chest; also seen in
veins, as in varicose veins
pregnancy and liver disease

Bright or ruby red; may become
purplish with age; 1–3 mm
Round, ﬂat, or sometimes
raised; may be surrounded
by a pale halo
Absent; may show partial
blanching, especially if
pressure applied with edge of
a pinpoint
Trunk; also extremities
None; increases in size and
numbers with aging

Purpuric Lesions
Petechia/Purpura

Ecchymosis

Color and Size

Deep red or reddish purple, fading away over
time; petechia, 1–3 mm; purpura are larger

Shape

Rounded, sometimes irregular; ﬂat

Purple or purplish blue, fading to green,
yellow, and brown with time; ariable size,
larger than petechiae, >3 mm
Rounded, oval, or irregular; may have a central
subcutaneous ﬂat nodule (a hematoma)

Pulsatility and Effect
of Pressure

Absent; no effect from pressure

Absent; no effect from pressure

Distribution

Variable

Variable

Signiﬁcance

Blood outside the vessels; may suggest a
bleeding disorder or, if petechiae, emboli to
skin; palpable purpura in vasculitis

Blood outside the vessels; often secondary to
bruising or trauma; also seen in bleeding
disorders

a

These are telangiectasias, or dilated small vessels that look red or bluish.

Sources of photos: Spider Angioma—Marks R. Skin Disease in Old Age. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1987; Petechia/Purpura—Kelley WN. Textbook of Internal
Medicine. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1989.

CHAPTER 6

| The Skin, Hair, and Nails

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

205

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 6-9 Signs of Sun Damage

Sun damage is one of the most important clues that a patient is at risk of skin cancer. Study carefully the following indicators of
sun damage accrued throughout life. These indicators should prompt close inspection for pink lesions that are possible basal cell
carcinomas; rough or keratotic lesions that may be actinic keratoses or squamous cell carcinomas; or asymmetric, multicolored, or
changing lesions that could be melanoma. Counsel affected patients about proper sun protection, not only for themselves but for
their families.

Solar lentigo: Bilaterally symmetric brown macules located
on sun-exposed skin, including the face, shoulders, and arms
and hands

Solar elastosis: Yellowish white macules or papules in
sun-exposed skin, especially on the forehead

Actinic purpura: Ecchymoses limited to the dorsal forearms
and hands but not extending above the “shirt sleeve” line on
the upper arm

Poikiloderma: Red patches in sun-damaged areas, especially the V of the neck, and lateral neck (usually sparing the
shadow inferior to the chin) with ﬁne telangiectasias, and
both hyper- and hypopigmentation

Wrinkles: Increased sun damage and tanning leads to deeper
wrinkles at an earlier age

Cutis rhomboidalis nuchae: Deep wrinkles on the posterior neck that “criss-cross”

206

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 6-10 Systemic
Diseases
Table 3.1 Motivational
Interviewing:
A Clinical Example
and Associated
Skin Findings
Systemic Disease

Associated Findings or Diagnoses

Addison disease

Hyperpigmentation of oral mucosa as well as sun-exposed skin, sites of trauma, and
creases of palms and soles

Acquired immune deﬁciency
syndrome

Human papillomavirus, herpes simplex virus, varicella zoster virus, cytomegalovirus,
molluscum contagiosum, bacterial abscesses, mycobacterium (tuberculosis, leprae,
avium) infections, candidiasis, deep fungal infections (cryptococcus, histoplasmosis),
oral hairy leukoplakia, Kaposi sarcoma, oral and anal squamous cell carcinoma,
acquired ichthyosis, severe psoriasis, severe seborrheic dermatitis, eosinophilic
folliculitis

Chagas disease (American
trypanosomiasis)

Unilateral conjunctivitis and lid edema associated with preauricular lymphadenopathy

Chronic renal disease

Pallor, xerosis, uremic frost, pruritus, “half and half” nails, calciphylaxis.

CREST syndrome

Calcinosis, Raynaud phenomenon, sclerodactyly, matted telangiectasias of face and
hands (palms)

Crohn disease

Erythema nodosum, pyoderma gangrenosum, enterocutaneous ﬁstulas, aphthous ulcers

Cushing disease

Striae, atrophy, purpura, ecchymoses, telangiectasias, acne, moon facies, buffalo hump,
hypertrichosis

Dermatomyositis

Violaceous erythema as macules, patches or papules in periocular region (heliotrope),
on interphalangeal joints (Gottron sign), and on upper back and shoulders (shawl
sign); poikiloderma in sun-exposed areas; periungual telangiectasia, ragged cuticles
(Samitz sign)

Diabetes

Pruritus, diabetic dermopathy, acanthosis nigricans, candidiasis, neuropathic ulcers,
necrobiosis lipoidica, eruptive xanthomas

Disseminated intravascular
coagulation

Purpura, petechiae, hemorrhagic bullae, induration, necrosis

Dyslipidemias

Xanthomas (tendon, eruptive, and tuberous), xanthelasma (may also occur in healthy people)

Gonococcemia

Purple to grey macules, papules or hemorrhagic pustules distributed over acral and
periarticular surfaces

Hemochromatosis

Skin bronzing and hyperpigmentation

Hypothyroidism

Dry, rough, and pale skin; coarse and brittle hair; myxedema; alopecia (lateral third of
the eyebrows to diffuse); skin cool to touch; thin and brittle nails

Hyperthyroidism

Warm, moist, soft, and velvety skin; thin and ﬁne hair; alopecia; vitiligo; pretibial
myxedema (in Graves disease); hyperpigmentation (local or generalized)

Infective endocarditis

Janeway lesions, Osler nodes, splinter hemorrhages, petechiae
(continued)

CHAPTER 6

| The Skin, Hair, and Nails

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

207

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 6-10 Systemic
Diseases

and Associated Skin Findings (Continued )

Systemic Disease

Associated Findings or Diagnoses

Kawasaki disease

Mucosal erythema (lips, tongue, and pharynx), strawberry tongue, cherry red lips,
polymorphous rash (primarily on trunk), erythema of palms and soles with later
desquamation of ﬁngertips

Liver disease

Jaundice, spider angiomas and other telangiectasias, palmar erythema, Terry nails,
pruritus, purpura, caput medusae

Leukemia/lymphoma

Pallor, exfoliative erythroderma, nodules, petechiae, ecchymoses, pruritus, vasculitis,
pyoderma gangrenosum, bullous diseases

Leukocytoclastic vasculitis (postcapillary venules)

Palpable purpura, purpuric wheals, hemorrhagic bullae in dependent areas

Lymphogranuloma venereum

Lymphadenopathy above and below Poupart ligament (groove sign)

Medium vessels vasculitides (e.g.,
polyarteritis nodosa, granulomatosis
with polyangiitis, eosinophilic
granulomatosis with polyangiitis,
microscopic polyangiitis)

Livedo racemosa, purpuric nodules, ulcers

Meningococcemia

Angular or stellate purpuric patches and plaques with gunmetal gray center. Progresses
to ecchymoses, bullae, necrosis

Neuroﬁbromatoses 1 (von
Recklinghausen syndrome)

Neuroﬁbromas, café-au-lait spots, freckling in the axillae (Crowe sign), plexiform
neuroﬁbroma

Pancreatitis (hemorrhagic)

Bruising and induration over the costovertebral angle (Grey Turner sign), Cullen sign,
panniculitis

Pancreatic carcinoma

Panniculitis, migratory thrombophlebitis (Trousseau sign)

Porphyria cutanea tarda

Photosensitivity with bullae and skin fragility on dorsal hands and forearms; bullae
rupture and heal with scarring and milia; hypertrichosis of the face; bronzing of skin
when associated with hemochromatosis

Pyoderma gangrenosum

Painful pustule quickly progressing to ragged ulcer with sharply marginated violaceous
border and undermined edges

Rocky Mountain spotted fever

Pink or reddish papules progressing to purpuric papules; starts on wrists and ankles
and spreads to palms and soles and then to trunk and face

Sarcoidosis

Red-brown plaques, often annular, typically involving the head and neck and especially
the nose and ears; may show apple jelly color with dermoscopy

Systemic lupus erythematosus

Malar erythema (mid cheeks, spans bridge of nose), relative sparing of nasolabial folds,
periungual erythema, interphalangeal erythema

208

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 6-11
Hair Loss Interviewing: A Clinical Example
3.1 Motivational
When taking a complete history of hair loss, include the duration, acuity of onset, cause from decreased hair density or increased
shedding, the pattern (diffuse or localized), medication history, hair care practices, and associated medical conditions or stressors.
Decrease in hair density is usually caused by male or female pattern hair loss, but less commonly by scarring alopecias. Hair shedding from
the roots is often caused by telogen efﬂuvium, alopecia areata, anagen efﬂuvium (insults to the hair shaft from exposure to agents like
chemotherapy) or less commonly, scarring alopecias. Perform a hair pull test to look for the percentage of telogen hairs. Hair shedding
from breakage at the hair shaft is often caused by tinea capitis, improper hair care, and less commonly hair shaft disorders or anagen
efﬂuvium. Perform a tug test to look for hair fragility. See Figures 6-27 and 6-28 on p. 188 for examples of the hair pull test and tug test.

Generalized or Diffuse Hair Loss
Male and female pattern hair loss affects over half of men by their 50 years of age, and over half of women by their 80 years of
age. In men, look for frontal hairline regression and thinning on the posterior vertex; in women, look for thinning that spreads
from the crown down without hairline regression. Severity is described by standardized classiﬁcations: Norwood-Hamilton (men)
and Ludwig (women). The hair pull test is normal or only pulls a few hairs.

Male pattern hair loss (MPHL)

Female pattern hair loss (FPHL)

Telogen Efﬂuvium and Anagen Efﬂuvium
In telogen efﬂuvium, overall, the patient’s scalp and hair distribution appear normal, but a positive hair pull test reveals most hairs
have telogen bulbs. In anagen efﬂuvium, there is diffuse hair loss from the roots. The hair pull test shows few if any hairs with
telogen bulbs.

Normal hair part width in telogen
efﬂuvium

Positive hair pull test in telogen efﬂuvium
showing all hairs have telogen bulbs

Anagen efﬂuvium

Focal Hair Loss
Alopecia Areata
There is sudden onset of clearly demarcated, usually localized, round or oval patches of hair loss leaving smooth skin without
hairs, in children and young adults. There is no visible scaling or erythema.

(continued)
CHAPTER 6

| The Skin, Hair, and Nails

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

209

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 6-11 Hair Loss (Continued )

Tinea Capitis (“Ringworm”)
There are round scaling patches of alopecia, mostly seen in children. There may be “black dots” of broken hairs and comma or
corkscrew hairs on dermoscopy. Usually caused by Trichophyton tonsurans from humans, and less commonly, Microsporum canis
from dogs or cats. Boggy plaques are called kerions.

Scarring Alopecia
Scarring on the scalp is characterized by shiny skin, complete loss of hair follicles, and often, discoloration. Presence of any
scarring should prompt referral to a dermatologist for possible scalp biopsy if the patient desires treatment. Examples of scarring
alopecia include central centrifugal scarring alopecia and discoid lupus erythematosus, among others.

Central centrifugal scarring alopecia

Discoid lupus scarring alopecia

Hair Shaft Disorders
Patients with abnormal hair from birth, as in this patient with a genetic condition called monilethrix, should be referred to
dermatology.

Hair shaft disorder with alternating bands
References: For a complete guide to evaluation of hair loss, review Mubki T, Rucnicka L, Olszewska M, et al. Evaluation and diagnosis of the hair loss patient.
J Am Acad Dermatol 2014;71:415. *See also Hair Loss Help. Hair loss classiﬁcations. Available at http://www.hairlosshelp.com/hair_loss_research/hair_loss_charts.
cfm. Accessed February 13, 2015.
Sources of photo: Alopecia Areata [left]—Hall JC. Sauer’s Manual of Skin Diseases, 9th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2006.

210

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 3.1
6-12Motivational
Findings in Interviewing:
or Near the Nails
A Clinical Example
Paronychia
A superﬁcial infection of the proximal and lateral nail folds adjacent to the nail plate. The
nail folds are often red, swollen, and tender. Represents the most common infection of the
hand, usually from Staphylococcus aureus or Streptococcus species, and may spread until it
completely surrounds the nail plate. Creates a felon if it extends into the pulp space of the
ﬁnger. Arises from local trauma due to nail biting, manicuring, or frequent hand immersion
in water. Chronic infections may be related to Candida.

Clubbing of the Fingers
Clinically, a bulbous swelling of the soft tissue at the nail base, with loss of the normal
angle between the nail and the proximal nail fold. The angle increases to 180° or more,
and the nail bed feels spongy or ﬂoating. The mechanism is still unknown but involves
vasodilatation with increased blood ﬂow to the distal portion of the digits and changes in
connective tissue, possibly from hypoxia, changes in innervation, genetics, or a plateletderived growth factor from fragments of platelet clumps. Seen in congenital heart disease,
interstitial lung disease and lung cancer, inﬂammatory bowel diseases, and malignancies.

Habit Tic Deformity
There is depression of the central nail with a “Christmas tree” appearance from small
horizontal depressions, resulting from repetitive trauma from rubbing the index ﬁnger over
the thumb or vice versa. Pressure on the nail matrix causes the nail to grow out
abnormally. Avoidance of the behavior leads to normal nail growth.

Melanonychia
Melanonychia is caused by increased pigmentation in the nail matrix, leading to a streak as
the nail grows out. This may be a normal ethnic variation if found in multiple nails. A thin
uniform streak may be caused by a nevus, but a wide streak, especially if growing or
irregular, could represent a subungual melanoma.
Onycholysis
A painless separation of the whitened opaque nail plate from the pinker translucent nail
bed. Fingernails that extend past the ﬁngertip are more likely to result in the traumatic
shearing forces that produce onycholysis. Starts distally and progresses proximally,
enlarging the free edge of the nail. Local causes include trauma from excess manicuring,
psoriasis, fungal infection, and allergic reactions to nail cosmetics. Systemic causes include
diabetes, anemia, photosensitive drug reactions, hyperthyroidism, peripheral ischemia,
bronchiectasis, and syphilis.
(continued)

CHAPTER 6

| The Skin, Hair, and Nails

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

211

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 6-12 Findings in or Near the Nails (Continued )
Onychomycosis
The most common cause of nail thickening and subungual debris is onychomycosis, most
often from the dermatophyte Trichophyton rubrum, but also from other dermatophytes and
some molds such as Alternaria and Fusarium species. Onychomycosis affects 1 in 5 over
age 60. The best prevention is to treat and prevent tinea pedis. Only half of all nail
dystrophies are caused by onychomycosis, so a positive fungal culture, potassium
hydroxide exam, or pathologic evaluation of nail clippings is recommended before treating
with oral antifungals.

Terry Nails
Nail plate turns white with a ground-glass appearance, a distal band of reddish brown, and
obliteration of the lunula. Commonly affects all ﬁngers, although may appear in only one
ﬁnger. Seen in liver disease, usually cirrhosis, heart failure, and diabetes. May arise from
decreased vascularity and increased connective tissue in nail bed.

Transverse Linear Depressions (Beau Lines)
Transverse depressions of the nail plates, usually bilateral, resulting from temporary
disruption of proximal nail growth from systemic illness. Timing of the illness may
be estimated by measuring the distance from the line to the nail bed (nails grow
approximately 1 mm every 6 to 10 days). Seen in severe illness, trauma, and cold
exposure if Raynaud disease is present.

Pitting
Punctate depressions of the nail plate caused by defective layering of the superﬁcial nail
plate by the proximal nail matrix. Usually associated with psoriasis but also seen in Reiter
syndrome, sarcoidosis, alopecia areata, and localized atopic or chemical dermatitis.

Sources of photos: Onycholysis, Terry Nails—Habif TP. Clinical Dermatology: A Color Guide to Diagnosis and Therapy, 2nd ed. St. Louis: CV Mosby, 1990.

212

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 6-13 Pressure Ulcers

Pressure (decubitus) ulcers usually develop over bony prominences subject to unrelieved pressure, resulting in ischemic damage to
underlying tissue. Prevention is important: inspect the skin thoroughly for early warning signs of erythema that still blanches with
pressure, especially in patients with risk factors. Pressure ulcers form most commonly over the sacrum, ischial tuberosities, greater
trochanters, and heels. A commonly applied staging system, based on depth of destroyed tissue, is illustrated below. Note that
necrosis or eschar must be debrided before ulcers can be staged. Ulcers may not progress sequentially through the four stages.
Inspect ulcers for signs of infection (drainage, odor, cellulitis, or necrosis). Fever, chills, and pain suggest underlying osteomyelitis.
Address the patient’s overall health, including comorbid conditions such as vascular disease, diabetes, immune deﬁciencies, collagen
vascular disease, malignancy, psychosis, or depression; nutritional status; pain and level of analgesia; risk for recurrence;
psychosocial factors such as learning ability, social supports, and lifestyle; and evidence of polypharmacy, overmedication, or
abuse of alcohol, tobacco, or illicit drugs.34,35

Risk Factors for Pressure Ulcers
■

Decreased mobility, especially if accompanied by increased
pressure or movement causing friction or shear stress
■ Decreased sensation, from brain or spinal cord lesions or
peripheral nerve disease

■

Decreased blood ﬂow from hypotension or microvascular
disease such as diabetes or atherosclerosis
■ Fecal or urinary incontinence
■ Presence of fracture
■ Poor nutritional status or low albumin

Stage I

Stage II

Presence of a reddened area that fails to blanch with pressure,
and changes in temperature (warmth or coolness),
consistency (ﬁrm or boggy), sensation (pain or itching), or
color (red, blue, or purple on darker skin; red on lighter skin)

The skin forms a blister or sore. Partial-thickness skin loss or
ulceration involving the epidermis, dermis, or both

Stage III

Stage IV

A crater appears in the skin, with full-thickness skin loss
and damage to or necrosis of subcutaneous tissue that may
extend to, but not through, underlying muscle

The pressure ulcer deepens. There is full-thickness skin loss,
with destruction, tissue necrosis, or damage to underlying
muscle, bone, and sometimes tendons and joints

Source: Used with permission of National Pressure Ulcer Advisory Panel, Washington, DC.

CHAPTER 6

| The Skin, Hair, and Nails

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

213

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
REFERENCES

References
1. Eichenfeld LF, Tom WL, Berger TG, et al. Guidelines of care for the
management of atopic dermatitis. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2014;71:116.
2. National Eczema Association. Available at http://nationaleczema.
org/eczema-products/moisturizers/. Accessed October 27, 2014.
3. Stern RS. Prevalence of a history of skin cancer in 2007: results of
an incidence-based model. Arch Dermatol. 2010;146:279.
4. Siegel R, Desantis C, Jemal A. Cancer statistics, 2015. CA Cancer J
Clin. 2015;65:5.
5. Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, et al. SEER Cancer Statistics
Review, 1975–2011. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute; 2014.
6. American Cancer Society. Key statistics about Melanoma Skin Cancer. Available at http://www.cancer.org/cancer/skincancer-melanoma/detailedguide/melanoma-skin-cancer-key-statistics.
Accessed February 2, 2015.
7. Naeyaert JM, Brochez L. Clinical practice. Dysplastic nevi. N Engl
J Med. 2003;349:2233.
8. American Academy of Dermatology. Skin cancer. Available at https://
www.aad.org/dermatology-a-to-z/diseases-and-treatments/q—t/
skin-cancer. Accessed February 11, 2015.
9. National Cancer Institute. Genetics of Skin Cancer (PDQ®). Melanoma. Available at http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/pdq/genetics/
skin/HealthProfessional/page4. Accessed February 14, 2015.
10. El Ghissassi F, Baan R, Straif K, et al. A review of human carcinogens—part D: radiation. Lancet Oncol. 2009;10:751.
11. Glanz K, Schoenfeld ER, Steffen A. A randomized trial of tailored
skin cancer prevention messages for adults: Project SCAPE. Am J
Public Health. 2010;100:735.
12. Lin JS, Eder M, Weinmann S. Behavioral counseling to prevent skin
cancer: a systematic review for the U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force. Ann Intern Med. 2011;154:190. See also http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK53508/. Accessed February 15, 2015.
13. Moyer VA. Behavioral counseling to prevent skin cancer: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern
Med. 2012;157:59. See also http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Topic/recommendation-summary/skin-cancercounseling?ds=1&s=. Accessed February 15, 2015.
14. Green AC, Williams GM, Logan V, et al. Reduced melanoma after
regular sunscreen use: randomized trial follow-up. J Clin Oncol,
2011;29:257.
15. American Academy of Dermatology. How do I prevent skin cancer.
Available at https://www.aad.org/spot-skin-cancer/understandingskin-cancer/how-do-i-prevent-skin-cancer. Accessed February 11,
2015.
16. Skin Cancer Foundation. Sun protection. Available at http://www.skincancer.org/prevention/sun-protection. Accessed February 15, 2015.
17. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for skin cancer.
Recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2009;150:188. See
also http://www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Topic/
recommendation-summary/skin-cancer-screening?ds=1&s=.
Accessed February 15, 2015.
18. Wolff T, Tai E, Miller T. Screening for skin cancer: an update of the
evidence for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Ann Intern

214

Med. 2009;150:194. See also http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK34051/. Accessed February 15, 2015.
19. Siegel R, Desantis C, Jemal A. Colorectal cancer statistics, 2014. CA
Cancer J Clin. 2014;64:104.
20. Aitken JF, Elwood M, Baade PD, et al. Clinical whole-body skin
examination reduces the incidence of thick melanomas. Int J Cancer. 2010;126:450.
21. Katalinic A, Waldmann A, Weinstock MA, et al. Does skin cancer
screening save lives? An observational study comparing trends in
melanoma mortality in regions with and without screening. Cancer. 2012;118:5395.
22. Swetter SM, Pollitt RA, Johnson TM, et al. Behavioral determinants
of successful early melanoma detection. Cancer. 2012;118:3725.
23. Grange F, Barbe L, Mas F, et al. The role of general practitioners in
diagnosis of cutaneous melanoma: a population-based study in
France. Br J Dermatol. 2012;167:1351.
24. Mayer JE, Swetter SM, Fu T, et al. Screening, early detection, education, and trends for melanoma: current status (2007–2013) and
future directions, Parts I and II. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2014;71:
599; 611.
25. Eide MJ, Asgari NM, Fletcher SW, et al. Effects on skills and practice from a web-based skin cancer course for primary care providers. J Am Board Fam Med. 2013;26:648.
26. Skinsight INFORMED Skin Cancer Education Series. Melanoma
and Skin Cancer Early Detection. http://www.skinsight.com/info/
for_professionals/skin-cancer-detection-informed/skin-cancereducation. Accessed February 15, 2015.
27. Abbasi NR, Shaw HM, Rigel DS, et al. Early diagnosis of cutaneous
melanoma revisiting the ABCD criteria. JAMA. 2004;292:2771.
28. American Cancer Society. Skin exams. Available at http://www.
cancer.org/cancer/skincancer-melanoma/moreinformation/
skincancerpreventionandearlydetection/skin-cancer-preventionand-early-detection-skin-exams. Accessed February 11, 2015.
29. McPherson M, Elwood M, English DR, et al. Presentation and
detection of invasive melanoma in a high-risk population. J Am
Acad Dermatol. 2006;54:783.
30. Zalaudek I, Kittler H, Marghoob AA, et al. Time required for a
complete skin examination with and without dermoscopy: a prospective, randomized multicenter study. Arch Dermatol. 2008;
144:509.
31. Learn Derm. http://www.visualdx.com/learnderm/. Accessed
February 15, 2015.
32. Mubki T, Rucnicka L, Olszewska M, et al. Evaluate and diagnosis
of the hair loss patient. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2014;71:415.
33. Thiboutot D, Gollnick H, Bettoli V, et al. New insights into the
management of acne: an update from the Global Alliance
to Improve Outcomes in Acne group. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2009;
60(5 Suppl):S1.
34. Smith TE, Totten A, Hickam DH, et al. Pressure ulcer treatment
strategies: a systemic comparative effectiveness review. Ann Intern
Med. 2013;159:39.
35. VanGilder C, MacFarlane G, Meyer S, et al. Body mass index,
weight, and pressure ulcer prevalence: an analysis of the 2006–
2007 International Pressure Ulcer Prevalence Surveys. J Nurs Care
Qual. 2009;24:127.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

