http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

C H A P T E R

8

The Thorax and Lungs
The Bates’ suite offers these additional resources to enhance learning and facilitate
understanding of this chapter:
■ Bates’ Pocket Guide to Physical Examination and History Taking, 8th edition
■ Bates’ Visual Guide to Physical Examination (Vol. 9: Thorax and Lungs)
■ thePoint online resources, for students and instructors: http://thepoint.lww.com

Anatomy and Physiology
Study the anatomy of the chest wall, identifying the structures illustrated
(Fig. 8-1). Note that the number of the intercostal space between two ribs is the
same number as the rib above it.
Suprasternal notch

2nd rib
Manubrium of
sternum
2nd rib
interspace

Sternal angle

2nd costal
cartilage
Body of sternum

Xiphoid process
Costochondral
junctions

Costal angle

FIGURE 8-1.

Chest wall anatomy.

CHAPTER 8

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Thorax and Lungs

303

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

Locating Findings on the Chest
Describe chest ﬁndings in two dimensions: along the vertical axis and around the
circumference of the chest.
Vertical Axis. To locate ﬁndings in the thorax, learn to number the ribs and
intercostal spaces (Fig. 8-2). Place your ﬁnger in the hollow curve of the suprasternal notch, then move it down approximately 5 cm to the horizontal bony
ridge where the manubrium joins the body of the sternum, called the sternal
angle or the angle of Louis. Directly adjacent to the sternal angle is the 2nd rib and
its costal cartilage. From here, using two ﬁngers, “walk down” the interspaces on
an oblique line, illustrated by the red numbers below. (Note that the ribs at the
lower edge of the sternum may be too close together to count correctly.) To count
the intercostal spaces in a woman, displace the breast laterally or palpate more
medially. Avoid pressing too hard on the tender breast tissue.

Sternal angle
(Angle of Louis)

Suprasternal notch

2nd rib

Note special landmarks:
2nd intercostal space for needle
insertion for tension pneumothorax.
● 4th intercostal space for chest tube
insertion.
● T4 for the lower margin of an endotracheal tube on a chest x-ray.
●

1
1

2
2

3
3

4

T4
4

5
5
6
6
7
7

11

8
9
10

12

8

FIGURE 8-2.

Neurovascular structures run along
the inferior margin of each rib, so
needles and tubes should be placed
just at the superior rib margins.

9

Anterior ribs and intercostal spaces.

Note that the costal cartilages of the ﬁrst seven ribs articulate with the sternum;
the cartilages of the 8th, 9th, and 10th ribs articulate with the costal cartilages
just above them. The 11th and 12th ribs, the “ﬂoating ribs,” have no anterior
attachments. The cartilaginous tip of the 11th rib usually can be felt laterally, and
304

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
the 12th rib may be felt posteriorly. When palpated, costal cartilages and ribs feel
identical.
Posteriorly, the 12th rib is a starting point for counting ribs and intercostal spaces
and provides an alternative to the anterior approach (Fig. 8-3). With the ﬁngers
of one hand, press in and up against the lower border of the 12th rib; then “walk
up” the intercostal spaces, numbered in red below, or follow a more oblique line
up and around to the front of the chest.

Spinous process of C7
Spinous process of T1

1
2

1
2

3
3
4
5

6
7

4
5

6
7
7th rib

8

8
9
10
11

9
10

Inferior angle
of scapula

Note the T7–T8 intercostal space as a
landmark for thoracentesis with needle insertion immediately superior to
the 8th rib.

11

12

FIGURE 8-3.

Posterior ribs and intercostal spaces.

The inferior tip of the scapula is another useful bony landmark; it usually lies at
the level of the 7th rib or interspace.
The spinous processes of the vertebrae are also useful landmarks. When the
neck is ﬂexed forward, the most protruding process is usually the vertebra of
C7. If two processes are equally prominent, they are C7 and T1. You can often
palpate and count the processes below them, especially when the spine is
ﬂexed.
CHAPTER 8

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Thorax and Lungs

305

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Circumference of the Chest. Visualize a series of vertical lines as shown in
Figures 8-4 through 8-6. The midsternal
and vertebral lines are easily demarcated
and reproducible; the others are visualized. The midclavicular line drops vertically from the midpoint of the clavicle. To
ﬁnd it, accurately identify both ends of
the clavicle (see p. 646).

Midsternal
line

Midclavicular
line

Anterior
axillary
line

F I G U R E 8 - 4 . Midsternal, midclavicular, and
anterior axillary lines.

The anterior and posterior axillary lines
drop vertically from the anterior and posterior axillary folds, the muscle masses that
border the axilla. The midaxillary line
drops from the apex of the axilla.

Anterior
axillary
line

Midaxillary
line
Posterior
axillary
line

FIGURE 8-5.
posterior lines.

Anterior, midaxillary, and

Posteriorly, the vertebral line overlies the
spinous processes of the vertebrae. The
scapular line drops from the inferior angle
of the scapula.
Scapular
line
Vertebral
line

FIGURE 8-6.

306

Vertebral and scapular lines.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Lungs, Fissures, and Lobes. Picture the lungs and their ﬁssures and lobes
on the chest wall. Anteriorly, the apex of each lung rises approximately 2 to 4 cm
above the inner third of the clavicle (Fig. 8-7). The lower border of the lung
crosses the 6th rib at the midclavicular line and the 8th rib at the midaxillary line.
Posteriorly, the lower border of the lung lies at about the level of the T10 spinous
process (Fig. 8-8). On inspiration, it descends in the chest cavity during contraction and descent of the diaphragm.
Apex
of lung
Horizontal
fissure

RUL

Oblique
fissure

LUL

LUL

Spinous
process
of T3

RUL

RML
RLL

LLL

LLL

RLL

Inspiratory
descent

FIGURE 8-7.

The anterior lungs.

FIGURE 8-8.

The posterior lungs.

Each lung is divided roughly in half by an oblique (major) ﬁssure. This ﬁssure may
be approximated by a string that runs from the T3 spinous process obliquely
down and around the chest to the 6th rib at the midclavicular line (Fig. 8-9). The
right lung is further divided by the horizontal (minor) ﬁssure. Anteriorly, this ﬁssure runs close to the 4th rib and meets the oblique ﬁssure in the midaxillary line
near the 5th rib. The right lung is thus divided into upper, middle, and lower lobes
(RUL, RML, and RLL). The left lung has only two lobes, upper and lower (LUL, LLL)
(Fig. 8-10). Each lung receives deoxygenated blood from its pulmonary artery.
Oxygenated blood returns from each lung to the left atrium via the pulmonary
veins.

RUL
LUL

Left oblique
fissure

RML
RLL

FIGURE 8-9.
and ﬁssures.

LLL

Right lung lobes

FIGURE 8-10.

Left lung lobes and ﬁssures.

CHAPTER 8

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Thorax and Lungs

307

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY
Locations on the Chest. Learn the general anatomical terms used to locate
chest ﬁndings.

Anatomic Descriptors of the Chest
Supraclavicular—above the clavicles
Infraclavicular—below the clavicles
Interscapular—between the scapulae
Infrascapular—below the scapulae
Bases of the lungs—the lowermost portions
Upper, middle, and lower lung ﬁelds

Usually, physical examination ﬁndings correlate with the underlying lobes. Signs
in the right upper lung ﬁeld, for example, almost certainly originate in the right
upper lobe. However, signs found laterally in the right middle lung ﬁeld could
come from any of the three different lobes.
The Trachea and Major Bronchi (the Tracheobronchial Tree). Breath
sounds over the trachea and bronchi have a harsher quality than those over the
denser lung parenchyma. Learn the locations of these structures. The trachea
bifurcates into its mainstem bronchi at the levels of the sternal angle anteriorly
and the T4 spinous process posteriorly (Figs. 8-11 and 8-12). The right main
bronchus is wider, shorter, and more vertical than the left main bronchus and
directly enters the hilum of the lung. The left main bronchus extends inferolaterally from below the aortic arch and anterior to the esophagus and thoracic aorta
and then enters the lung hilum. Each main bronchus then divides into lobar then
into segmental bronchi and bronchioles, terminating in the sac-like pulmonary alveoli, where gas exchange occurs.

Trachea

Trachea

Left main
bronchus

Left main
bronchus

Right main
bronchus

Right main
bronchus

F I G U R E 8 - 1 1 . Trachea and mainstem
bronchi, anterior view.

F I G U R E 8 - 1 2 . Trachea and mainstem
bronchi, posterior view.

The Pleurae. Two continuous pleural surfaces, or serous membranes, separate the lungs from the chest wall. The visceral pleura covers the outer surface
of the lungs. The parietal pleura lines the pleural cavity along the inner rib cage
and the upper surface of the diaphragm. Between the visceral and parietal
pleura is the pleural space, containing serous pleural ﬂuid. The surface tension
of the pleural ﬂuid keeps the lung in contact with the thoracic wall, allowing
the lung to expand and contract during respiration. The visceral pleura lacks
308

Aspiration pneumonia is more common
in the right middle and lower lobe
because the right main bronchus is
more vertical.

Accumulations of pleural fluid, or pleural effusions, may be transudates, seen
in heart failure, cirrhosis, and nephrotic
syndrome, or exudates, seen in numerous conditions including pneumonia,
malignancy, pulmonary embolism,
tuberculosis, and pancreatitis.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

sensory nerves, but the parietal pleura is richly innervated by the intercostal
and phrenic nerves.

Irritation of the parietal pleura produces pleuritic pain with deep inspiration in viral pleurisy, pneumonia,
pulmonary embolism, pericarditis, and
collagen vascular diseases.

Breathing. Breathing is primarily automatic, controlled by respiratory centers in the brainstem that generate the neuronal drive for the muscles of respiration. The principal muscle of inspiration is the diaphragm. During
inspiration, the diaphragm contracts, descends in the chest, and expands the
thoracic cavity, compressing the abdominal contents and pushing out the
abdominal wall. The muscles in the rib cage also expand the thorax, especially
the scalenes, which run from the cervical vertebrae to the ﬁrst two ribs, and
the parasternal intercostal muscles, or parasternals, which cross obliquely
from the sternum to the ribs. As the thorax expands, intrathoracic pressure
decreases, drawing air through the tracheobronchial tree into the alveoli, or
distal air sacs, ﬁlling the expanding lungs. Oxygen diffuses into the adjacent
pulmonary capillaries as carbon dioxide exchanges from the blood into the
alveoli.

During expiration, the chest wall and lungs recoil and the diaphragm relaxes
and rises passively. Abdominal muscles assist in expiration. As air ﬂows outward, the chest and abdomen return to their resting positions.
Normal breathing is quiet and easy—barely audible near the open mouth as
a faint whish. When a healthy person lies supine, the breathing movements
of the thorax are relatively slight. By contrast, the abdominal movements are
usually easy to see. In the sitting position, movements of the thorax become
more prominent.
During exercise and in certain diseases, extra work is required to breathe, and
accessory muscles are recruited; the sternocleidomastoids (SCM) and the scalenes may become visible (Fig. 8-13).

Sternal
head
Clavicular
head

of the sternocleidomastoid
muscle

Scalene muscles

FIGURE 8-13.

Accessory muscles in the neck.

CHAPTER 8

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Thorax and Lungs

309

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY

The Health History
Common or Concerning Symptoms
Chest pain
Shortness of breath (dyspnea)
● Wheezing
● Cough
● Blood-streaked sputum (hemoptysis)
● Daytime sleepiness or snoring and disordered sleep
●
●

Chest Pain. Complaints of chest pain or chest discomfort raise concerns about
the heart but often arise from other structures in the thorax and lungs. To assess
this symptom, you must pursue a dual investigation of both thoracic and cardiac causes. Sources of chest pain are listed below. For this important symptom,
keep all of these possibilities in mind.

See Table 8-1, Chest Pain,
pp. 330–331.

Sources of Chest Pain and Related Causes
The myocardium
The pericardium
The aorta
The trachea and large bronchi
The parietal pleura
The chest wall, including the musculoskeletal and neurologic systems
The esophagus
Extrathoracic structures such as the
neck, gallbladder, and stomach

Angina pectoris, myocardial infarction,
myocarditis
Pericarditis
Aortic dissection
Bronchitis
Pericarditis, pneumonia, pneumothorax,
pleural eﬀusion, pulmonary embolus
Costochondritis, herpes zoster

Chest pain is reported in one in four
patients with panic and anxiety
disorders.1–3

Gastroesophageal reﬂux disease, esophageal spasm, esophageal tear
Cervical arthritis, biliary colic, gastritis

This section focuses on pulmonary complaints, including chest wall symptoms,
difﬁculty breathing (dyspnea), wheezing, cough, coughing up blood (hemoptysis),
and daytime sleepiness or snoring and disordered sleep. For symptoms of exertional chest pain, palpitations, shortness of breath when supine (orthopnea) or at
night relieved by sitting upright (paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea), and edema, see
Chapter 9, The Cardiovascular System (see pp. 355–358).
Your initial questions should be as open-ended as possible. “Do you have any
discomfort or unpleasant feelings in your chest?” Ask the patient to point to the
location of the pain in the chest. Watch for any gestures as the patient describes
the pain. Elicit all seven attributes of chest pain to distinguish among its various
causes (see p. 79).

310

A clenched fist over the sternum suggests angina pectoris; a finger pointing to a tender spot on the chest wall
suggests musculoskeletal pain; a hand
moving from the neck to the epigastrium suggests heartburn.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

THE HEALTH HISTORY
Lung tissue has no pain ﬁbers. Pain in conditions such as pneumonia or pulmonary infarction usually arises from inﬂammation of the adjacent parietal pleura.
Muscle strain from prolonged recurrent coughing or costochondral inﬂammation may also be responsible. The pericardium also has few pain ﬁbers. The pain
of pericarditis stems from inﬂammation of the adjacent parietal pleura. Extrapulmonary sources of chest pain include gastroesophageal reﬂux disease and anxiety, but the mechanism remains obscure.1–4
Shortness of Breath (Dyspnea) and Wheezing. Shortness of breath, or dyspnea, is a painless but uncomfortable awareness of breathing that is inappropriate to the level of exertion.5 Thoroughly assess this telltale symptom of cardiac
and pulmonary disease.

The degree of dyspnea, combined
with spirometry, is a key component
of important chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) classification systems that guide patient
management.6–8

Ask, “Have you had any difﬁculty breathing?” Find out if the symptom occurs at
rest or with exertion, and how much exertion produces onset. Because of variations in age, body weight, and physical ﬁtness, there is no absolute scale for
quantifying shortness of breath. Instead, make every effort to determine its
severity based on the patient’s daily activities. How many steps or ﬂights of stairs
can the patient climb before pausing for breath? What about carrying bags of
groceries, vacuuming, or making the bed? Has shortness of breath altered the
patient’s lifestyle and daily activities? How? Carefully elicit the timing and setting, any associated symptoms, and relieving or aggravating factors.

See Table 8-2, Dyspnea, pp. 332–333.

Most patients relate shortness of breath to their level of activity. Anxious patients
present a different picture. They may describe difﬁculty taking a deep enough
breath, a smothering sensation with inability to get enough air, and paresthesias,
which are sensations of tingling or “pins and needles” around the lips or in the
extremities.

Anxious patients may have episodic
dyspnea during both rest and exercise
and also hyperventilation, or rapid
shallow breathing.

Wheezes are musical respiratory sounds that may be audible to the patient and
to others.

Wheezing occurs in partial lower airway obstruction from secretions and
tissue inflammation in asthma, or from
a foreign body.9

Cough. Cough is a common symptom that ranges in signiﬁcance from trivial
to ominous. Typically, cough is a reﬂex response to stimuli that irritate receptors
in the larynx, trachea, or large bronchi. These stimuli include mucus, pus, blood,
as well as external agents such as allergens, dust, foreign bodies, or even extremely
hot or cold air. Other causes include inﬂammation of the respiratory mucosa,
pneumonia, pulmonary edema, and compression of the bronchi or bronchioles
from a tumor or enlarged peribronchial lymph nodes. Cough may also be cardiovascular in origin.

See Table 8-3, Cough and Hemoptysis,
p. 334.

Cough can signal left-sided heart
failure.

CHAPTER 8

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Thorax and Lungs

311

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
THE HEALTH HISTORY

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

For complaints of cough, pursue a thorough assessment. Establish the duration.
Is the cough acute, lasting less than 3 weeks; subacute, lasting 3 to 8 weeks; or
chronic, more than 8 weeks?

The most common cause of acute
cough is viral upper respiratory infections. Also consider acute bronchitis,
pneumonia, left-sided heart failure,
asthma, foreign body, smoking, and
ace-inhibitor therapy. Postinfectious
cough, pertussis, acid reflux, bacterial
sinusitis, and asthma can cause subacute cough. Chronic cough is seen in
postnasal drip, asthma, gastroesophageal reflux, chronic bronchitis, and
bronchiectasis.10–17

Ask whether the cough is dry or produces sputum, or phlegm.

Mucoid sputum is translucent, white,
or gray and seen in viral infections
and cystic fibrosis; purulent sputum—
yellow or green—often accompanies
bacterial pneumonia.

Ask the patient to describe the volume of any sputum and its color, odor, and
consistency.

Foul-smelling sputum is present in
anaerobic lung abscess, thick tenacious sputum in cystic fibrosis.

To help patients quantify volume, try a multiple-choice question. “How much do
you think you cough up in 24 hours: a teaspoon, tablespoon, quarter cup, half
cup, cupful?” If possible, ask the patient to cough into a tissue; inspect the
phlegm, and note its characteristics. The symptoms associated with a cough
often lead to its cause.

Large volumes of purulent sputum
are present in bronchiectasis and lung
abscess.

Hemoptysis. Hemoptysis refers to blood coughed up from the lower respiratory tract; it may vary from blood-streaked sputum to frank blood. For patients
reporting hemoptysis, quantify the volume of blood produced, the setting and
activity, and any associated symptoms. Hemoptysis is rare in infants, children,
and adolescents.

See Table 8-3, Cough and Hemoptysis, p. 334. Causes include bronchitis;
malignancy; and cystic fibrosis and,
less commonly, bronchiectasis, mitral
stenosis, Goodpasture syndrome, and
Wegener granulomatosis. Massive
hemoptysis (>200 cm3) may be
life-threatening.18

Before using the term “hemoptysis,” try to conﬁrm the source of the bleeding.
Blood or blood-streaked material may originate in the nose, mouth, pharynx, or
gastrointestinal tract and is easily mislabeled. If vomited, it probably originates
in the gastrointestinal tract. Occasionally, however, blood from the nasopharynx
or the gastrointestinal tract is aspirated and then coughed out.

Blood originating in the stomach is
usually darker than blood from the
respiratory tract and may be mixed
with food particles.

312

Diagnostically helpful symptoms
include fever and productive cough in
pneumonia; wheezing in asthma; and
chest pain, dyspnea, and orthopnea
in acute coronary syndromes.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Daytime Sleepiness or Snoring and Disordered Sleep. Patients may
report excessive daytime sleepiness and fatigue. Ask about problems with snoring, witnessed apneas (deﬁned as breathing cessation for ≥10 seconds), awakening with a choking sensation, or morning headache.

These symptoms, especially daytime
sleepiness and snoring, are hallmarks
of obstructive sleep apnea, commonly
seen in patients with obesity, posterior
malocclusion of the jaw (retrognathia),
treatment-resistant hypertension,
heart failure, atrial fibrillation, stroke,
and type 2 diabetes. Mechanisms
include instability of the brainstem
respiratory center, disordered sleep
arousal, disordered contraction of
upper airway muscles (genioglossus
malfunction), and anatomic changes
contributing to airway collapse such as
obesity, among others.19,20

Health Promotion and
Counseling: Evidence and
Recommendations
Important Topics for Health Promotion
and Counseling
Tobacco cessation
Lung cancer
● Immunizations—inﬂuenza and streptococcal pneumonia vaccines
●
●

Tobacco Cessation. Despite declining smoking rates over the past several
decades, 19% of U.S. adults continue to smoke, although the proportion of heavy
smokers (>30 cigarettes per day) has dropped from about 13% to 8%.21 Nearly
90% of smokers ﬁrst tried cigarettes by age 18 years.22 About 23% of high-school
students and 7% of middle-school students use tobacco products, most often
cigarettes or cigars, and use is higher among males than females. Smokers are
more likely than nonsmokers to develop cardiovascular disease, emphysema, and
lung cancer. Tobacco use is the leading preventable cause of premature death in
the United States, accounting for one in ﬁve deaths each year.23 Half of all longterm smokers die of smoking-related diseases, losing an average of 10 years of life.

Quitting smoking signiﬁcantly reduces disease risk. The facts below can be
motivating when counseling smokers.
■ Quitting tobacco reduces the cardiovascular risk of heart attack and death

from coronary heart disease by half after just 1 year.
■ Stroke risk is reduced within 2 to 5 years to the same level as a nonsmoker.
■ Lung cancer risk is cut in half after 10 years.

The United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) has given a grade A
recommendation to screening all adults, particularly pregnant women, for tobacco
use and providing tobacco cessation interventions to all who are using tobacco.24
CHAPTER 8

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Thorax and Lungs

313

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING

Adverse Effects of Smoking on
Health and Disease

Condition
Coronary artery disease
Stroke
● Peripheral vascular disease
● COPD mortality
● Lung cancer
●
●

Increased Risk Compared
with Nonsmokers
2–4 times higher
2–4 times higher
10 times higher
12–13 times higher
23 times higher mortality in men
13 times higher mortality in women

Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, DHHS. Smoking and tobacco use. Fact sheet.
Health eﬀects of cigarette smoking. Available at: http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/fact_
sheets/health_eﬀects/eﬀects_cig_smoking/index.htm. Accessed March 31, 2015.

In addition to respiratory tract cancers, smoking contributes to cancers of the
bladder, cervix, colon and rectum, kidney, oropharynx, larynx, esophagus, stomach, liver, and pancreas as well as acute myeloid leukemia.25 Smoking increases
risk of infertility, preterm birth, low birth weight, and sudden infant death syndrome. Smoking is associated with developing diabetes, cataracts, and rheumatoid arthritis. Nonsmokers exposed to smoke also have increased risk of lung
cancer, ear and respiratory infections, and asthma.
Clinicians should focus on prevention and cessation, especially in teenagers and
pregnant women.26 Because most smokers see a health care provider each year
and nearly 70% of smokers express interest in quitting, clinicians have an important opportunity to identify and treat tobacco dependence.27,28 Behavioral support and pharmacotherapy are both effective strategies. Combining these
strategies is more effective than either strategy alone as it addresses withdrawal
symptom and cravings as well as enhances motivation and skills for quitting. The
beneﬁts of even brief counseling interventions are considerable—advising smokers to quit during every visit raises quit rates by 30%.29 Use the “5 As” framework or the Stages of Change model to assess readiness to quit.24,30 Motivational
interviewing techniques are also helpful for patients who are not yet ready to quit
smoking.27,28

Assessing Readiness to Quit Smoking:
Brief Interventions Models
5 As Model
Ask about tobacco use
● Advise to quit
● Assess willingness to make a
quit attempt
● Assist in quit attempt
● Arrange follow-up
●

314

Stages of Change Model
Precontemplation—“I don’t want to quit.”
Contemplation—“I am concerned but
not ready to quit now.”
● Preparation—“I am ready to quit.”
● Action—“I just quit.”
● Maintenance—“I quit 6 months ago.”
●
●

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
Nicotine is highly addicting, comparable to heroin and cocaine, and quitting is
difﬁcult. More than 80% of smokers who try to quit on their own resume smoking
within 30 days and only 3% of smokers quit successfully each year.31 Stimulation
of the nicotinic cholinergic receptors in the brain increases release of dopamine,
which enhances pleasure and modulates mood. Daily smokers inhale enough nicotine to achieve almost complete receptor saturation. The inhaled nicotine reaches the
brain in seconds, causing a powerful and reinforcing rush effect. Use cognitive therapy techniques to help smokers recognize and design strategies to combat the
features of addiction: craving, triggers such as stress or environmental cues, and
signs of withdrawal like irritability, poor concentration, anxiety, and depressed
mood. Quit rates roughly double when counseling is combined with pharmacotherapies such as nicotine replacement, bupropion, and varenicline.32
Lung Cancer
Epidemiology. Lung cancer is the second most frequently diagnosed cancer in the United States and the leading cause of cancer death for both men and
women.33 Over 200,000 new cases and nearly 160,000 deaths (accounting for
about 27% of all cancer deaths) were expected in 2014. Incidence rates and
death rates have been decreasing since 2006.
Risk Factors. Cigarette smoking is by far the leading risk factor for lung
cancer, accounting for about 90% of lung cancer deaths.22 Longer smoking histories and higher numbers of cigarettes smoked are associated with higher risk.
Radon, an invisible, odorless, radioactive gas released from soil and rocks in the
ground, is the second leading cause of lung cancer in the United States. Other
environmental and occupational exposures include second-hand smoke, asbestos, heavy metals, organic chemicals, ionizing radiation, and air pollution. Lung
cancer also has a familial risk.
Prevention. The most important strategies aim to prevent people from
ever using tobacco products and getting tobacco users to quit. The previous section highlights smoking cessation strategies. Avoiding environmental and occupational exposures can also reduce lung cancer risk.
Screening. Another strategy for addressing the burden of cancer is screening,
also known as secondary prevention, which targets ﬁnding and treating early-stage
cancers. This is particularly important for lung cancer; cancers diagnosed at an early
stage (before metastasis) have a 54% 5-year relative survival.34 Meanwhile, the 5-year
relative survival is a dismal 4% for cancers diagnosed at later stages (metastatic).
Unfortunately, only 15% of lung cancers are diagnosed at an early stage.
Screening Tests and Evidence. Numerous studies conducted over many
years have shown that lung cancer screening with chest x-ray or sputum cytology
is not effective. Recently, however, the National Lung Screening Trial (NLST)
showed that screening with low-dose computed tomography (LDCT) reduced the
risk of dying from lung cancer compared to chest x-ray screening.35 The NLST
was a randomized trial that enrolled more than 53,000 adults aged 55 to 74 years
at risk for lung cancer due to at least a 30-pack-year smoking history or current
smoking or having quit within the past 15 years. Subjects received three annual
CHAPTER 8

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Thorax and Lungs

315

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
HEALTH PROMOTION AND COUNSELING
screenings with LDCT or chest x-rays. After nearly 7 years of follow-up, lung
cancer deaths were reduced by 20% with LDCT compared to chest x-ray. However, the absolute beneﬁt was small; >320 subjects needed screening to prevent
one lung cancer death. Although about 40% of study subjects had an abnormal
LDCT, over 95% of these results were false positives. Screening can lead to harms,
including anxiety over false-positive tests, complications from invasive diagnostic
procedures, and cancer risks from radiation exposure.
Screening Guidelines from Major Organizations. The USPSTF has
given lung cancer screening with LDCT a B rating, meaning that there is a net
beneﬁt to offering screening.36 Annual LDCT screening is recommended for current smokers (or those who have quit within the last 15 years) aged 55 to
79 years. The American Cancer Society also recommends annual screening,
although only until age 74 years.37 Both organizations agree that all current smokers should receive counseling about smoking cessation and should be offered cessation interventions. Before offering screening, clinicians should engage patients in
discussions about the potential beneﬁts, limitations, and harms of screening—and
emphasize that screening is not a substitute for smoking cessation.
Immunizations (Adults)
Inﬂuenza. Inﬂuenza can cause substantial morbidity and mortality, especially during the late fall and winter, peaking in February.38 The number of annual
deaths related to inﬂuenza varies depending on the virus type and subtype, ranging from a few thousand to nearly 50,000 deaths. The Centers for Disease Control
(CDC) Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) updates its recommendations for vaccination annually. Two types of vaccine are available: the
“ﬂu shot,” an inactivated vaccine containing killed virus, and a nasal-spray vaccine containing attenuated live viruses, approved only for healthy people between
the ages of 2 and 49 years.39 Because inﬂuenza viruses mutate from year to year,
each vaccine contains three to four vaccine strains and is modiﬁed yearly. Note
that annual vaccination is recommended for everyone aged ≥6 months.

Summary of 2015-2016 CDC Inﬂuenza Vaccine
Recommendations—Adults
Annual vaccination is recommended for all people aged 6 months and older,
especially the groups listed below.40
● Adults with chronic pulmonary and cardiovascular conditions (except hypertension) and renal, hepatic, neurologic, hematologic, or metabolic disorders (including diabetes mellitus); adults who are immunosuppressed or morbidly obese
● Adults ≥50 years of age
● Pregnant women and women up to 2 weeks postpartum
● Residents of nursing homes and long-term care facilities
● American Indians and Alaska natives
● Health care personnel
● Household contacts and caregivers of children ≤5 years of age (especially
infants ≤age 6 months) and of adults ≥50 years of age with clinical conditions
placing them at higher risk for complications of inﬂuenza

316

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
Streptococcal Pneumonia. Streptococcal pneumonia causes pneumonia,
bacteremia, and meningitis. In 2009, invasive pneumococcal disease accounted
for 43,500 cases and 5,000 deaths.41 However, the introduction of the 7-valent
pneumococcal vaccination for infants and children in 2000 has directly and
indirectly (through herd immunity) reduced pneumococcal infections among
children and adults.42 Since 2010, infants younger than age 2 years have routinely been vaccinated with the 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine
(PCV13). In 2014, the ACIP recommended vaccinating adults aged ≥65 years
using the PCV13 along with the 23-valent inactivated pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23). The vaccines should not be coadministered. Adults
in this age range who never received the PPSV23 should ﬁrst receive the PCV13
followed 6 to 12 months later by the PPSV23. Adults aged ≥65 years previously
vaccinated with PPSV23 should receive a dose of PCV13 no earlier than 1 year
following the most recent PPSV23 vaccination. The ACIP recommends using
PCV13 and PPSV23 for the high-risk groups listed below.

Summary of 2015 CDC Pneumococcal Vaccine
Recommendations
Adults ≥65 years
Children and adults from ages 2 to 64 years with chronic illnesses speciﬁcally
associated with increased risk of pneumococcal infection (sickle cell disease,
cardiovascular and pulmonary disease, diabetes, alcoholism, cirrhosis,
cochlear implants, and leaks of cerebrospinal ﬂuid)
● Any adult aged 19 to 64 years who is a smoker or has asthma
● Adults and children older than age 2 years who are immunocompromised
(including from HIV infection, AIDS, long-term steroids, Hodgkin disease,
lymphoma or leukemia, kidney failure, multiple myeloma, nephrotic
syndrome, organ transplant, damaged spleen or no spleen, radiation, or
chemotherapy)
● Residents of nursing homes or long-term care facilities
●
●

Techniques of Examination
For best results, examine the posterior thorax and lungs while the patient is sitting, and the anterior thorax and lungs with the patient supine. Be considerate
when draping the patient’s gown. For men, arrange the gown so that you can see
the full chest. For women, cover the anterior chest when you examine the back;
for the anterior examination, drape the gown over each half of the chest as you
examine the other half. Begin with inspection, then palpate, percuss, and auscultate. Try to visualize the underlying lobes and compare the right lung ﬁeld
with the left, carefully noting any asymmetries.
■ With the patient sitting, examine the posterior thorax and lungs. The patient’s

arms should be folded across the chest with hands resting, if possible, on the
opposite shoulders. This position swings the scapulae laterally and increases
access to the lung ﬁelds. Then ask the patient to lie down.
CHAPTER 8

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Thorax and Lungs

317

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

■ With the patient supine, examine the anterior thorax and lungs. For women,

this position allows the breasts to be gently displaced. Some clinicians examine both the posterior and anterior chest with the patient sitting, which is
also satisfactory.
■ For patients who cannot sit up, ask for assistance so that you can examine the

posterior chest in the sitting position. If this is not possible, roll the patient
to one side and then to the other. Percuss and auscultate both lungs in each
position. Because ventilation is relatively greater in the dependent lung, you
are more likely to hear abnormal wheezes or crackles on the dependent side
(see p. 325).

Initial Survey of Respiration and the Thorax
Even though the respiratory rate might already be recorded, again carefully
observe the rate, rhythm, depth, and effort of breathing. A healthy resting adult
breathes quietly and regularly about 20 times a minute. Note whether expiration
lasts longer than usual.
Begin by observing the patient for signs of respiratory distress.

See Table 8-4, Abnormalities in Rate
and Rhythm of Breathing, p. 335,
including bradypnea, tachypnea,
hyperventilation, Cheyne–Stokes
breathing, and ataxic breathing.
Delayed expiration occurs in COPD.

Signs of Respiratory Distress
■ Assess the respiratory rate for tachypnea (>25 breaths/minute).

Tachypnea increases the likelihood of
pneumonia and cardiac disease.

■ Inspect the patient’s color for cyanosis or pallor. Recall earlier relevant ﬁnd-

Cyanosis in the lips, tongue, and oral
mucosa signals hypoxia. Pallor and
sweating (diaphoresis) are common in
heart failure. Clubbing of the nails (see
p. 211) occurs in bronchiectasis, congenital heart disease, pulmonary fibrosis, cystic fibrosis, lung abscess, and malignancy.

ings, such as the shape and color of the ﬁngernails.

■ Listen for audible sounds of breathing. Is there audible whistling during inspi-

ration over the neck or lungs?

■ Inspect the neck. During inspiration, is there contraction of the accessory mus-

cles, namely the SCM and scalene muscles, or supraclavicular retraction?
During expiration, is there contraction of the intercostal or abdominal
oblique muscles? Is the trachea midline?
Also observe the shape of the chest, which is normally wider than it is deep. The
ratio of the anteroposterior (AP) diameter to the lateral chest diameter is usually
0.7 to 0.75 up to 0.9 and increases with aging.43

318

Audible high-pitched inspiratory whistling, or stridor, is an ominous sign of
upper airway obstruction in the larynx
or trachea that requires urgent airway
evaluation. Wheezing is either expiratory or continuous.
Accessory muscle use signals difficulty
breathing from COPD or respiratory
muscle fatigue. Lateral displacement
of the trachea occurs in pneumothorax, pleural effusion, and atelectasis.
This ratio may exceed 0.9 in COPD,
producing a barrel-chest appearance,
although evidence of this correlation
is conflicting.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

Examination of the Posterior Chest
Inspection. Standing in a midline position behind the patient, note the shape
of the chest and how the chest moves, including the following:

See Table 8-5, Deformities of the
Thorax, p. 336.

■ Deformities or asymmetry in chest expansion

Asymmetric expansion occurs in large
pleural effusions.

■ Abnormal muscle retraction of the intercostal spaces during inspiration,

Retraction occurs in severe asthma,
COPD, or upper airway obstruction.

most visible in the lower intercostal spaces.
■ Impaired respiratory movement on one or both sides or a unilateral lag (or

delay) in movement.

Unilateral impairment or lagging suggests pleural disease from asbestosis
or silicosis; it is also seen in phrenic
nerve damage or trauma.

Palpation. As you palpate the chest, focus on areas of tenderness or bruising,
respiratory expansion, and fremitus.

Intercostal tenderness can develop
over inflamed pleurae, costal cartilage
tenderness in costochondritis.

■ Identify tender areas. Carefully palpate any area where the patient reports pain

Tenderness, bruising, and bony “stepoffs” are common over a fractured rib.
Crepitus may be palpable in overt
fractures and arthritic joints; crepitus
and chest wall edema are seen in
mediastinitis.

or has visible lesions or bruises. Note any palpable crepitus, deﬁned as a
crackling or grinding sound over bones, joints, or skin, with or without pain,
due to air in the subcutaneous tissue.

■ Assess any skin abnormalities such as masses or sinus tracts (blind, inﬂamma-

tory, tube-like structures opening onto the skin).

■ Test

chest expansion. Place your
thumbs at about the level of the
10th ribs, with your ﬁngers loosely
grasping and parallel to the lateral
rib cage (Fig. 8-14). As you position
your hands, slide them medially just
enough to raise a loose fold of skin
between your thumbs over the
spine. Ask the patient to inhale
deeply. Watch the distance between
your thumbs as they move apart
during inspiration, and feel for the
range and symmetry of the rib cage
as it expands and contracts. This
movement is sometimes called lung
excursion.

Although rare, sinus tracts suggest
infection of the underlying pleura
and lung (as in tuberculosis or actinomycosis).
Unilateral decrease or delay in chest
expansion occurs in chronic fibrosis of
the underlying lung or pleura, pleural
effusion, lobar pneumonia, pleural
pain with associated splinting, unilateral bronchial obstruction, and paralysis of the hemidiaphragm.

FIGURE 8-14.
expansion.

Assess lung

CHAPTER 8

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Thorax and Lungs

319

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

■ Palpate both lungs for symmetric tac-

Fremitus is decreased or absent when
the voice is higher pitched or soft or
when the transmission of vibrations
from the larynx to the surface of the
chest is impeded by a thick chest wall,
an obstructed bronchus, COPD, or
pleural effusion, fibrosis, air (pneumothorax), or an infiltrating tumor.

tile fremitus (Fig. 8-15). Fremitus
refers to the palpable vibrations
that are transmitted through the
bronchopulmonary tree to the
chest wall as the patient is speaking
and is normally symmetric. Fremitus is typically more prominent in
the interscapular area than in the
lower lung ﬁelds and easier to detect over the right lung than the left.
It disappears below the diaphragm.

4

1

1

2

2

3

3
4

To detect fremitus, use either the F I G U R E 8 - 1 5 . Locations for
ball (the bony part of the palm at palpating fremitus.
the base of the ﬁngers) or the ulnar
surface of your hand to optimize the vibratory sensitivity of the bones in
your hand. Ask the patient to repeat the words “ninety-nine” or “one-oneone.” Initially practice with one hand until you feel the transmitted vibrations. Use both hands to palpate and compare symmetric areas of the lungs in
the pattern shown in the photograph. Identify and locate any areas of
increased, decreased, or absent fremitus. If fremitus is faint, ask the patient
to speak more loudly or in a deeper voice.
Tactile fremitus is a somewhat imprecise assessment technique, but does
direct your attention to possible asymmetries. Conﬁrm any disparities by
listening for underlying breath sounds, voice sounds, and whispered voice
sounds. All these attributes should increase or decrease together.

Asymmetric decreased fremitus raises
the likelihood of unilateral pleural
effusion, pneumothorax, or neoplasm,
which decreases transmission of lowfrequency sounds; asymmetric
increased fremitus occurs in unilateral
pneumonia which increases transmission through consolidated tissue.44

Percussion. Percussion is one of the most important techniques of physical
examination. Percussion sets the chest wall and underlying tissues in motion,
producing audible sound and palpable vibrations. Percussion helps you establish whether the underlying tissues are air-ﬁlled, ﬂuid-ﬁlled, or consolidated.
The percussion blow penetrates only 5 to 7 cm into the chest, however, and will
not aid in detection of deep-seated lesions.

The technique of percussion can be practiced on any surface. As you practice,
listen for changes in percussion notes over different types of materials or different
parts of the body. The key points for good technique, described for a righthanded person, are detailed below:
■ Hyperextend the middle ﬁnger of

your left hand, known as the pleximeter ﬁnger. Press its distal interphalangeal joint ﬁrmly on the lung
surface to be percussed (Fig. 8-16).
Avoid surface contact by any other part
of the hand because this dampens out
vibrations. Note that the thumb and
second, fourth, and ﬁfth ﬁngers are
not touching the chest wall.
320

F I G U R E 8 - 1 6 . Press the pleximeter
ﬁnger ﬁrmly on the chest wall.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Position your right forearm quite close to the surface, with the hand cocked

upward. The middle ﬁnger should be partially ﬂexed, relaxed, and poised to
strike.
■ With a quick, sharp but relaxed wrist

motion, strike the pleximeter ﬁnger
with the right middle ﬁnger, called
the plexor ﬁnger (Fig. 8-17). Aim at
your distal interphalangeal joint.
Your goal is to transmit vibrations
through the bones of this joint to the
underlying chest wall. Use the same
force for each percussion strike and
the same pleximeter pressure to
avoid changes in the percussion note
due to your technique rather than
underlying ﬁndings.

F I G U R E 8 - 1 7 . Strike the pleximeter ﬁnger with the right middle ﬁnger.

■ Strike using the tip of the plexor ﬁn-

ger, not the ﬁnger pad. The striking
ﬁnger should be almost at right
angles to the pleximeter. A short
fingernail is recommended to
avoid injuring your knuckle.
■ Withdraw

your striking finger
quickly to avoid damping the vibrations you have created (Fig. 8-18).

F I G U R E 8 - 1 8 . Withdraw the
striking ﬁnger quickly.

In summary, the movement is at the wrist. It is directed, brisk, yet relaxed and
slightly bouncy.
Percussion Notes. With your plexor or striking ﬁnger, use the lightest
percussion that produces a clear note. A thick chest wall requires a more forceful
percussion blow than a thin one. However, if a louder note is needed, apply
more pressure with the pleximeter ﬁnger.

When percussing the lower posterior chest, stand somewhat to the side rather
than directly behind the patient. In this position it is easier to place your pleximeter ﬁnger more ﬁrmly on the chest, making your plexor strike more effective
by creating a better percussion note.
■ When comparing two areas, use the same percussion technique in both areas.

Percuss or strike twice in each location and listen for differences in the percussion notes at the two locations.
■ Learn to identify ﬁve percussion notes. You can practice four of them on your-

self. These notes differ in their basic qualities of sound, intensity, pitch, and
duration. Train your ear by concentrating on one quality at a time as you
CHAPTER 8

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Thorax and Lungs

321

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
percuss ﬁrst in one location, then in another. Review the description of percussion notes on p. 323. Healthy lungs are resonant.
While the patient keeps both arms crossed in front of the chest, percuss the
thorax in symmetric locations on each side from the apex to the base.
■ Percuss one side of the chest and then

the other at each level in a ladder-like
pattern, as shown in Figure 8-19.
Omit the areas over the scapulae—
the thickness of muscle and bone
alters the percussion notes over the
lungs. Identify and locate the area
and quality of any abnormal percussion note.

6
7

1

1

2

2

3

3

4

4

5

5

6
7

F I G U R E 8 - 1 9 . Percuss and
auscultate in a “ladder” pattern.
■ Identify the descent of the diaphragm, or diaphragmatic excursion. First, deter-

mine the level of diaphragmatic dullness during quiet respiration. Holding the
pleximeter ﬁnger above and parallel to the expected level of dullness, percuss
downward in progressive steps until dullness clearly replaces resonance.
Conﬁrm this level of change by percussing downward from adjacent areas
both medially and laterally (Fig. 8-20).

Location
and sequence
of percussion

Dullness replaces resonance when fluid
or solid tissue replaces air-containing
lung or occupies the pleural space
beneath your percussing fingers.
Examples include: lobar pneumonia, in
which the alveoli are filled with fluid
and blood cells; and pleural accumulations of serous fluid (pleural effusion),
blood (hemothorax), pus (empyema),
fibrous tissue, or tumor. Dullness
makes pneumonic and pleural
effusion three to four times more
likely, respectively.45
Generalized hyperresonance is common over the hyperinflated lungs of
COPD or asthma. Unilateral hyperresonance suggests a large pneumothorax
or an air-filled bulla.
This technique tends to overestimate
actual movements of the diaphragm.45

Resonant
Level of
diaphragm

Dull
Dull

FIGURE 8-20.

Identify the extent of diaphragmatic excursion.

F I G U R E 8 - 2 1 . Absent descent
of the diaphragm can indicate pleural
effusion.

An abnormally high level suggests a
pleural effusion or an elevated hemidiaphragm from atelectasis or phrenic
nerve paralysis (Fig. 8-21).

322

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

Percussion Notes and Their Characteristics

Flat
Dull
Resonant
Hyperresonant
Tympanitic

Relative
Intensity

Relative
Pitch

Relative
Duration

Example of
Location

Soft
Medium
Loud
Very loud
Loud

High
Medium
Low
Lower
Higha

Short
Medium
Long
Longer
Longer

Thigh
Liver
Healthy lung
Usually none
Gastric air bubble
or puﬀed-out
cheek

Pathologic Examples
Large pleural effusion
Lobar pneumonia
Simple chronic bronchitis
COPD, pneumothorax
Large pneumothorax

a

Distinguished mainly by its musical timbre.

Note that with this technique, you are identifying the boundary between the
resonant lung tissue and the duller structures below the diaphragm. You are not
percussing the diaphragm itself. You can infer the probable location of the diaphragm from the level of dullness.
Now, estimate the extent of diaphragmatic excursion by determining the distance
between the level of dullness on full expiration and the level of dullness on full
inspiration, normally about 3 to 5.5 cm.46
Auscultation. Auscultation is the most important examination technique for
assessing air ﬂow through the tracheobronchial tree. Auscultation involves
(1) listening to the sounds generated by breathing, (2) listening for any adventitious
(added) sounds, and (3) if abnormalities are suspected, listening to the sounds of
the patient’s spoken or whispered voice as they are transmitted through the chest
wall. Before beginning auscultation, ask the patient to cough once or twice to clear
mild atelectasis or airway mucus that can produce unimportant extra sounds.

Bedclothes, paper gowns, and even
chest hair can generate confusing
crackling sounds that interfere with
auscultation. For chest hair, press
harder or moisten the hair.

Listen to the breath sounds with the diaphragm of your stethoscope after
instructing the patient to breathe deeply through an open mouth. Always
place the stethoscope directly on the skin. Clothing alters the characteristics
of the breath sounds and can introduce friction and added sounds.

Air movement through a partially
obstructed nose or nasopharynx can
also introduce abnormal sounds.

Use the ladder pattern suggested for percussion, moving from one side to the
other and comparing symmetric areas of the lungs. Listen to at least one full
breath in each location. If you hear or suspect abnormal sounds, auscultate adjacent areas to assess the extent of any abnormality. If the patient becomes lightheaded from hyperventilation, allow the patient to take a few normal breaths.
Note the intensity of the breath sounds, which reﬂects the air ﬂow rate at the
mouth, and may vary from one area to another. Breath sounds are usually louder
in the lower posterior lung ﬁelds. If the breath sounds seem faint, ask the patient
to breathe more deeply. Shallow breathing or a thick chest wall can both alter
breath sound intensity.

Breath sounds may be decreased when
air flow is decreased (as in obstructive
lung disease or respiratory muscle
weakness) or when the transmission of
sound is poor (as in pleural effusion,
pneumothorax, or COPD).

CHAPTER 8

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Thorax and Lungs

323

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

Is there a silent gap between the inspiratory and expiratory sounds?

A gap suggests bronchial breath
sounds.

Listen for the pitch, intensity, and duration of the inspiratory and expiratory sounds.
Are vesicular breath sounds distributed normally over the chest wall? Are breath
sounds diminished, or are there bronchovesicular or bronchial breath sounds in
unexpected places? If so, in what distribution?
Breath Sounds (Lung Sounds). Learn to identify breath sounds by their
intensity, their pitch, and the relative duration of their inspiratory and expiratory
phases. Normal breath sounds are:
■ Vesicular, or soft and low pitched. They are heard throughout inspiration,

continue without pause through expiration, and then fade away about one
third of the way through expiration.

In cold or tense patients, watch for
muscle contraction sounds—muffled,
low-pitched rumbling, or roaring
noises. Changing the patient’s position may eliminate this noise. To
reproduce these sounds on yourself,
do a Valsalva maneuver (straining
down) as you listen to your own chest.

■ Bronchovesicular, with inspiratory and expiratory sounds about equal in

length, at times separated by a silent interval. Detecting differences in pitch
and intensity is often easier during expiration.
■ Bronchial, or louder, harsher and higher in pitch, with a short silence be-

tween inspiratory and expiratory sounds. Expiratory sounds last longer than
inspiratory sounds.
■ Tracheal, or loud harsh sounds heard over the trachea in the neck.

The characteristics of these four kinds of breath sounds are summarized below.
Characteristics of Breath Sounds

Duration of
Sounds
Vesiculara

Inspiratory sounds Soft
last longer than
expiratory
sounds.

Broncho- Inspiratory and
vesicular
expiratory
sounds are
almost equal.

Bronchial

Intensity
of
Expiratory
Sound

Intermediate

Expiratory
Loud
sounds last
longer than
inspiratory ones.

Pitch of
Expiratory
Sound

Locations
Where
Heard
Normally

Relatively low Over most of
both lungs

Intermediate Often in the 1st
and 2nd
interspaces
anteriorly
and between
the scapulae

If bronchovesicular or bronchial
breath sounds are heard in locations
distant from those listed, suspect
replacement of air-filled lung by fluidfilled or consolidated lung tissue.

Relatively
high

See Table 8-6, Normal and Altered
Breath and Voice Sounds, p. 337.

Over the
manubrium,
(larger proximal airways)
(continued )

324

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

Characteristics of Breath Sounds (continued )
Intensity
of
Expiratory
Sound

Duration of
Sounds
Tracheal

Inspiratory and
expiratory
sounds are
almost equal.

Very loud

Pitch of
Expiratory
Sound
Relatively
high

Locations
Where
Heard
Normally
Over the trachea in the
neck

a

The thickness of the bars indicates intensity; the steeper their incline, the higher the pitch.
Sources: Loudon R and Murphy LH. Lungs sounds. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1994;130:663; Bohadana A,
Izbicki G, Kraman SS. Fundamentals of lung auscultation. N Engl J Med. 2014;370:744; Wilkins RL,
Dexter JR, Murphy RLH, et al. Lung sound nomenclature survey, Chest. 1990;98:886; Schreur HJW,
Sterk PJ, Vanderschoot JW, et al. Lung sound intensity in patients with emphysema and in normal
subjects at standardised airﬂows. Thorax. 1992;47:674; Bettancourt PE, DelBono EA, Speigelman D,
et al. Clinical utility of chest auscultation in common pulmonary disease. Am J Resp Crit Care Med.
1994;150:1921.

Adventitious (Added) Sounds. Listen for any added, or adventitious,
sounds that are superimposed on the usual breath sounds. Detection of adventitious sounds—crackles (sometimes called rales), wheezes, and rhonchi—is an
important focus of your examination, often leading to diagnosis of cardiac and
pulmonary conditions. The most common adventitious sounds are described
below. Note that the American Thoracic Society describes rhonchi as a lowpitched wheeze (unrelated to airway secretions), so some recommend not using
the term “rhonchi.”47,48

For further discussion and other
added sounds, see Table 8-7, Adventitious (Added) Lung Sounds: Causes
and Qualities, p. 338.

Adventitious or Added Breath Sounds
Crackles (or Rales)

Wheezes and Rhonchi

Discontinuous

Continuous

●

●
●

●

Intermittent, nonmusical, and
brief
Like dots in time

●

●

Fine crackles: soft, high-pitched
(∼650 Hz), very brief (5–10 ms)

Coarse crackles: somewhat
louder, lower in pitch (∼350 Hz),
brief (15–30 ms)

●

●

Sinusoidal, musical, prolonged (but not
necessarily persisting throughout the
respiratory cycle)

Crackles can arise from abnormalities
of the lung parenchyma (pneumonia,
interstitial lung disease, pulmonary
fibrosis, atelectasis, heart failure) or of
the airways (bronchitis, bronchiectasis).

Like dashes in time
Wheezes: relatively high-pitched (≥400
Hz) with hissing or shrill quality (>80 ms)

Wheezes arise in the narrowed airways of asthma, COPD, and bronchitis.

Rhonchi: relatively low-pitched (150–200
Hz) with snoring quality (>80 ms)

Many clinicians use the term “rhonchi”
to describe sounds from secretions in
large airways that may change with
coughing.

Source: Loudon R, Murphy LH. Lungs sounds. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1994;130:663; Bohadana A, Izbicki G,
Kraman SS. Fundamentals of lung auscultation. N Engl J Med. 2014;370:744.

CHAPTER 8

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Thorax and Lungs

325

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

If you hear crackles, especially those that do not clear after coughing, listen carefully for the following characteristics.47,49–52 These are clues to the underlying
condition:
■ Loudness, pitch, and duration, summarized as ﬁne or coarse crackles
■ Number, few to many

Fine late inspiratory crackles that persist from breath to breath suggest
abnormal lung tissue.

■ Timing in the respiratory cycle
■ Location on the chest wall
■ Persistence of their pattern from breath to breath
■ Any change after a cough or change in the patient’s position

The crackles of heart failure are usually best heard in the posterior inferior lung fields.
Clearing of crackles, wheezes, or rhonchi after coughing or position change
suggests inspissated secretions, seen
in bronchitis or atelectasis.

In some normal people, crackles may be heard at the anterior lung bases after
maximal expiration. Crackles in dependent portions of the lungs may also occur
after prolonged recumbency.
If you hear wheezes or rhonchi, note their timing and location. Do they change
with deep breathing or coughing? Beware of the silent chest, in which air movement is minimal.

In the advanced airway obstruction of
severe asthma, wheezes and breath
sounds may be absent due to low
respiratory airflow (the “silent chest”),
a clinical emergency.
Findings predictive of COPD include
combinations of symptoms and signs,
especially dyspnea and wheezing by
self-report or examination, plus >70
pack-years of smoking, history of
bronchitis or emphysema, and
decreased breath sounds. Diagnosis
requires spirometry and, often, further
pulmonary testing.6,53–58

Note that tracheal sounds originating in the neck such as stridor and vocal cord
dysfunction can be transmitted to the chest and mistaken for wheezing, leading
to inappropriate or delayed treatment.

Stridor and laryngeal sounds are
loudest over the neck, whereas true
wheezes and rhonchi are faint or
absent over the neck.47

Note any pleural rubs, which are coarse, grating biphasic sounds heard primarily
during expiration.

Pleural rubs may be heard in pleurisy,
pneumonia, and pulmonary embolism.

Transmitted Voice Sounds. If you hear abnormally located bronchovesicular or bronchial breath sounds, assess transmitted voice sounds using three
techniques below. With diaphragm of your stethoscope, listen in symmetric
areas over the chest wall for abnormal vocal resonances suspicious for pneumonia or pleural effusion.

Increased transmission of voice sounds
suggests that embedded airways are
blocked by inflammation or secretions.47 See Table 8-6, Normal and
Altered Breath and Voice Sounds, p. 337.

326

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Egophony. Ask the patient to say “ee.” You will normally hear a mufﬂed long

E sound.
■ Bronchophony. Ask the patient to say “ninety-nine.” Normally the sounds

transmitted through the chest wall are mufﬂed and indistinct. Louder voice
sounds are called bronchophony.

■ Whispered pectoriloquy. Ask the patient to whisper “ninety-nine” or “one-

two-three.” The whispered voice is normally heard faintly and indistinctly,
if at all.

If “ee” sounds like “A” and has a nasal
bleating quality, an E-to-A change, or
egophony, is present.
Localized bronchophony and egophony are seen in lobar consolidation
from pneumonia. In patients with
fever and cough, the presence of
bronchial breath sounds and egophony more than triples the likelihood
of pneumonia.59
Louder, clearer whispered sounds are
called whispered pectoriloquy.

Examination of the Anterior Chest
When examined in the supine position, the patient should lie comfortably with
arms somewhat abducted. If the patient is having difﬁculty breathing, raise the
head of the examining table or the bed to increase respiratory excursion and ease
of breathing.

Persons with severe COPD may prefer
to sit leaning forward, with lips
pursed during exhalation and arms
supported on their knees or a table.

Inspection. Observe the shape of the patient’s chest and the movement of the
chest wall. Note:
■ Deformities or asymmetry of the thorax

See Table 8-5, Deformities of the
Thorax, p. 336.

■ Abnormal retraction of the lower intercostal spaces during inspiration, or

Abnormal retraction occurs in severe
asthma, COPD, or upper airway
obstruction.
Lag occurs in underlying diseases of
the lung or pleura.

any supraclavicular retraction
■ Local lag or impairment in respiratory movement

Palpation. Palpate the anterior chest wall for the following purposes:
■ Identiﬁcation of tender areas

Tender pectoral muscles or costal cartilages suggest, but do not prove, that
chest pain has a localized musculoskeletal origin.

■ Assessment of bruising, sinus tracts, or other skin changes
■ Assessment

of chest expansion.
Place your thumbs along each
costal margin, your hands along
the lateral rib cage (Fig. 8-22). As
you position your hands, slide
them medially a bit to raise loose
skin folds between your thumbs.
Ask the patient to inhale deeply.
Observe how far your thumbs
diverge as the thorax expands,
and feel for the extent and symmetry of respiratory movement.

FIGURE 8-22.

Assess chest expansion.
CHAPTER 8

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Thorax and Lungs

327

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

TECHNIQUES OF EXAMINATION
■ Assessment

of tactile fremitus. If
needed, compare both sides of the
chest, using the ball or ulnar surface of your hand. Fremitus is usually decreased or absent over the
precordium. When examining a
woman, gently displace the breasts
as necessary (Fig. 8-23).

1

1

2

3

2

3

F I G U R E 8 - 2 3 . Locations for
palpating fremitus.

Percussion. As needed, percuss the
anterior and lateral chest, again comparing both sides (Fig. 8-24). The
heart normally produces an area of
dullness to the left of the sternum from
the 3rd to the 5th interspaces.

1

5

1

2

2

3

3
4

4

6

5
6

Dullness represents airway obstruction from inflammation or secretions.
Because pleural fluid usually sinks to
the lowest part of the pleural space
(posteriorly in a supine patient), only
a very large effusion can be detected
anteriorly.
The hyperresonance of COPD may
obscure dullness over the heart.

In a woman, to enhance percussion,
gently displace the breast with your
left hand while percussing with the
right, or ask the patient to move the
breast for you.

F I G U R E 8 - 2 4 . Palate and percuss
in a “ladder” pattern.

The dullness of right middle lobe pneumonia typically occurs behind the
right breast. Unless you displace the
breast, you may miss the abnormal
percussion note.

Identify and locate any area with an abnormal percussion note.
Percuss for liver dullness and gastric tympany. With your pleximeter ﬁnger above
and parallel to the expected upper border of liver dullness, percuss in progressive steps downward in the right
midclavicular line (Fig. 8-25). Identify
the upper border of liver dullness. Later,
during the abdominal examination, you
will use this method to estimate the size
of the liver. As you percuss down the
chest on the left, the resonance of normal lung usually changes to the tympany of the gastric air bubble.

The hyperinflated lung of COPD often
displaces the upper border of the liver
downward and lowers the level of diaphragmatic dullness posteriorly.

F I G U R E 8 - 2 5 . Percuss for liver
dullness and gastric tympany.

Auscultation. Listen to the chest anteriorly and laterally as the patient
breathes with mouth open, and somewhat more deeply than normal. Compare
symmetric areas of the lungs, using the pattern suggested for percussion and
extending it to adjacent areas, if indicated.
328

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

EXAMPLES OF ABNORMALITIES

RECORDING YOUR FINDINGS
■ Listen to the breath sounds, noting their intensity and identifying any varia-

tions from normal vesicular breathing. Breath sounds are usually louder in
the upper anterior lung ﬁelds. Bronchovesicular breath sounds may be heard
over the large airways, especially on the right.
■ Identify any adventitious sounds, time them in the respiratory cycle, and locate

them on the chest wall. Do they clear with deep breathing?
■ If indicated, listen for transmitted voice sounds.

Special Techniques

See Table 8-7, Adventitious (Added)
Lung Sounds: Causes and Qualities,
p. 338, and Table 8-8, Physical Findings in Selected Chest Disorders,
pp. 339–340.

Clinical Assessment of Pulmonary Function. Walk tests are practical,
simple ways to assess cardiopulmonary function commonly used in rehabilitation and pre- and postoperative settings. The 2002 American Thoracic Society
guidelines that standardize the 6-minute walk test continue to predict clinical
outcomes in most patients with COPD.60,61 The test is easy to administer and
requires only a 100-foot hallway. It measures “the distance that a patient can
quickly walk on a ﬂat, hard surface in a period of 6 minutes” and provides a
global evaluation of the pulmonary and cardiovascular systems, neuromuscular units, and muscle metabolism. Review the speciﬁcs of testing, which should
be done on two occasions and include taking the clinical history and vital
signs. This test as well as shorter tests continue to be evaluated.58
Forced Expiratory Time. This test assesses the expiratory phase of breathing, which is typically slowed in obstructive pulmonary disease. Ask the patient to
take a deep breath in and then breathe out as quickly and completely as possible
with mouth open. Listen over the trachea with the diaphragm of a stethoscope and
time the audible expiration. Try to get three consistent readings, allowing a short
rest between efforts, if necessary.

Patients ≥age 60 years with a forced
expiratory time of ≥9 seconds are four
times more likely to have COPD.62

Identiﬁcation of a Fractured Rib. Local pain and tenderness of one or
more ribs raise the question of fracture. By AP compression of the chest, you can
help to distinguish a fracture from soft-tissue injury. With one hand on the sternum
and the other on the thoracic spine, squeeze the chest. Is this painful, and where?

An increase in the local pain (distant
from your hands) suggests rib fracture
rather than just soft-tissue injury.

Recording Your Findings
Note that initially you may use sentences to describe your ﬁndings; later you will
use phrases.
Recording the Physical Examination—The
Thorax and Lungs
“Thorax is symmetric with good expansion. Lungs resonant. Breath sounds vesicular; no crackles, wheezes, or rhonchi. Diaphragms descend 4 cm bilaterally.”
OR
“Thorax symmetric with moderate kyphosis and increased AP diameter, decreased
expansion. Lungs are hyperresonant. Breath sounds distant with delayed expiratory phase and scattered expiratory wheezes. Fremitus decreased; no bronchophony, egophony, or whispered pectoriloquy. Diaphragms descend 2 cm bilaterally.”

These findings suggest COPD.

CHAPTER 8

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Thorax and Lungs

329

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 8-1 Chest Pain
Problem

Process

Location

Quality

Severity

Temporary myocardial
ischemia, usually
secondary to coronary
atherosclerosis

Retrosternal or across
the anterior chest, often
radiates to the shoulders,
arms, neck, lower jaw, or
upper abdomen

Pressing, squeezing,
tight, heavy,
occasionally burning

Mild to moderate,
sometimes perceived
as discomfort rather
than pain

Myocardial
Infarction

Prolonged myocardial
ischemia, resulting in
irreversible muscle
damage or necrosis

Same as in angina

Same as in angina

Often, but not
always, a severe pain

Pericarditis

Irritation of parietal
pleura adjacent to the
pericardium

Retrosternal or left
precordial, may radiate
to the tip of left shoulder

Sharp, knifelike

Often severe

Aortic Dissection

A splitting within the
layers of the aortic wall,
allowing passage of
blood to dissect a
channel

Anterior or posterior
chest, radiating to the
neck, back, or abdomen

Ripping, tearing

Very severe

Inﬂammation of the
parietal pleura, as in
pleurisy, pneumonia,
pulmonary infarction, or
neoplasm; rarely,
subdiaphragmatic
abscess

Chest wall overlying the
process

Sharp, knifelike

Often severe

Retrosternal, may radiate
to the back

Burning, may be
squeezing

Mild to severe

Cardiovascular
Angina
Pectoris

Pulmonary
Pleuritic Pain

Gastrointestinal and Other
Irritation or
Gastrointestinal
inﬂammation of the
Reﬂux Disease
esophageal mucosa due
to reﬂux of gastric acid
from lowered esophageal
sphincter tone
Diffuse Esophageal
Spasm

Motor dysfunction of the
esophageal muscle

Retrosternal, may radiate
to the back, arms, and
jaw

Usually squeezing

Mild to severe

Chest Wall Pain,
Costochondritis

Variable, including
trauma, inﬂammation
of costal cartilage

Often below the left
breast or along the costal
cartilages

Stabbing, sticking,
or dull, aching

Variable

Anxiety, Panic
Disorder

Unclear

Precordial, below the left
breast, or across the
anterior chest

Stabbing, sticking,
or dull, aching

Variable

Note: Chest pain may be referred from extrathoracic structures in the neck (arthritis) and abdomen (biliary colic, acute cholecystitis).

330

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Timing

Factors That Aggravate

Factors That Relieve

Associated Symptoms

Usually 1–3 min but up
to 10 min. Prolonged
episodes up to 20 min

Often exertion, especially in the
cold; meals; emotional stress.
May occur at rest

Often, but not always, rest,
nitroglycerin

Sometimes dyspnea, nausea,
sweating

20 min to several hours

Not always triggered by exertion

Not relieved by rest

Dyspnea, nausea, vomiting,
sweating, weakness

Persistent

Breathing, changing position,
coughing, lying down,
sometimes swallowing

Sitting forward may relieve
it

Seen in autoimmune disorders,
postmyocardial infarction, viral
infection, chest irradiation

Abrupt onset, early peak,
persistent for hours or
more

Hypertension

If thoracic, hoarseness,
dysphagia; also syncope,
hemiplegia, paraplegia

Persistent

Deep inspiration, coughing,
movements of the trunk

Of the underlying illness

Variable

Large meal; bending over, lying
down

Antacids, sometimes
belching

Sometimes regurgitation,
dysphagia; also cough,
laryngitis, asthma

Variable

Swallowing of food or cold
liquid; emotional stress

Sometimes nitroglycerin

Dysphagia

Fleeting to hours or days

Coughing; movement of chest,
trunk, arms

Often local tenderness

Fleeting to hours or days

May follow effort, emotional
stress

Breathlessness, palpitations,
weakness, anxiety

CHAPTER 8

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Thorax and Lungs

331

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 8-2 Dyspnea
Problem

Process

Timing

Left-Sided Heart Failure
(Left Ventricular Failure or
Mitral Stenosis)

Elevated pressure in pulmonary capillary bed with
transudation of ﬂuid into interstitial spaces and alveoli,
decreased compliance (increased stiffness) of the lungs,
increased work of breathing

Dyspnea may progress
slowly, or suddenly as in
acute pulmonary edema

Chronic Bronchitis

Excessive mucus production in bronchi, followed by
chronic obstruction of airways

Chronic productive cough
followed by slowly
progressive dyspnea

Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary
Disease (COPD)

Overdistention of air spaces distal to terminal
bronchioles, with destruction of alveolar septa, alveolar
enlargement, and limitation of expiratory air ﬂow

Slowly progressive
dyspnea; relatively mild
cough later

Asthma

Reversible bronchial hyperresponsiveness involving
release of inﬂammatory mediators, increased airway
secretions, and bronchoconstriction

Acute episodes, separated
by symptom-free periods.
Nocturnal episodes
common

Diffuse Interstitial Lung Diseases
(e.g., Sarcoidosis, Widespread Neoplasms,
Idiopathic Pulmonary Fibrosis, and Asbestosis)

Abnormal and widespread inﬁltration of cells, ﬂuid,
and collagen into interstitial spaces between alveoli;
many causes

Progressive dyspnea,
which varies in its rate of
development with the
cause

Pneumonia

Infection of lung parenchyma from the respiratory
bronchioles to the alveoli

An acute illness, timing
varies with the causative
agent

Spontaneous Pneumothorax

Leakage of air into pleural space through blebs on
visceral pleura, with resulting partial or complete
collapse of the lung

Sudden onset of dyspnea

Acute Pulmonary Embolism

Sudden occlusion of part of pulmonary arterial tree by a
blood clot that usually originates in deep veins of legs
or pelvis

Sudden onset of
tachypnea, dyspnea

Anxiety with Hyperventilation

Overbreathing, with resultant respiratory alkalosis and
fall in arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2)

Episodic, often recurrent

Sources: Parshall MB, Schwartzstein RM, Adams L, et al; American Thoracic Society Committee on Dyspnea. An ofﬁcial American Thoracic Society
statement: update on the mechanisms, assessment, and management of dyspnea. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2012;185:435; Wenzel RP, Fowler AA. Acute
bronchitis. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:2125; Badgett RG, Tanaka DJ, Hunt DK, et al. Can moderate chronic obstructive pulmonary disease be diagnosed by
historical and physical ﬁndings alone? Am J Med. 1993;94:188; Holleman DR, Simel DL. Does the clinical examination predict airﬂow limitation? JAMA.
1995;273:63; Straus SE, McAlister FA, Sackett DL, et al. The accuracy of patient history, wheezing, and laryngeal measurements in diagnosing obstructive
airway disease. JAMA. 2000;283:1853; Panettieri RA. In the clinic: asthma. Ann Intern Med. 2007;146:ITC6–1; Littner M. In the clinic: chronic obstructive

332

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Factors That
Aggravate

Factors That
Relieve

Associated
Symptoms

Exertion, lying down

Rest, sitting up, though
dyspnea may become
persistent

Often cough, orthopnea,
paroxysmal nocturnal
dyspnea; sometimes
wheezing

History of heart disease or its
predisposing factors

Exertion, inhaled irritants,
respiratory infections

Expectoration; rest,
though dyspnea may
become persistent

Chronic productive cough,
recurrent respiratory infections; wheezing may develop

History of smoking, air pollutants,
recurrent respiratory infections; often
present with COPD

Exertion

Rest, though dyspnea
may become persistent

Cough, with scant mucoid
sputum

History of smoking, air pollutants,
sometimes a familial deﬁciency in α1antitrypsin

Variable, including
allergens, irritants,
respiratory infections,
exercise, cold, and emotion

Separation from
aggravating factors

Wheezing, cough, tightness
in chest

Environmental conditions

Exertion

Rest, though dyspnea
may become persistent

Often weakness, fatigue;
cough less common than in
other lung diseases

Varied; exposure to trigger substances

Exertion, smoking

Rest, though dyspnea
may become persistent

Pleuritic pain, cough,
sputum, fever, though not
necessarily present

Varied

Pleuritic pain, cough

Often a previously healthy young adult
or adult with emphysema

Setting

Exertion

Rest, though dyspnea
may become persistent

Often none; retrosternal
oppressive pain if massive
occlusion; pleuritic pain,
cough, syncope, hemoptysis,
and/or unilateral leg swelling
and pain from instigating
deep vein thrombosis;
anxiety (see below)

Postpartum or postoperative periods;
prolonged bed rest; heart failure, chronic
lung disease, and fractures of hip or leg;
deep venous thrombosis (often not clinically apparent); also hypercoagulability,
hereditary (i.e., protein C, S, factor V
Leiden deﬁciency) or acquired (e.g.,
cancer, hormonal therapy)

Often occurs at rest; an
upsetting event may not be
evident

Breathing in and out of
a paper or plastic bag
may help

Sighing, lightheadedness,
numbness or tingling of the
hands and feet, palpitations,
chest pain

Other manifestations of anxiety may be
present, such as chest pain diaphoresis,
palpitations

pulmonary disease. Ann Intern Med. 2011;154:ITC4–1; Neiwoehner DR. Outpatient management of severe COPD. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:1407; Global
Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease. Global strategy for the diagnosis, management, and prevention of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Updated 2015. Available at http://www.goldcopd.org/uploads/users/ﬁles/GOLD_Report_2015_Feb18.pdf. Accessed April 6, 2015; Neiderman M. In the
clinic: community-acquired pneumonia. Ann Intern Med. 2009;151:ITC4–1–ITC4–16; Agnelli G, Becattini C. Acute pulmonary embolism. N Engl J Med.
2010;363:266; Katerndahl DA. Chest pain and its importance in patients with panic disorder: an updated literature review. Prim Care Companion J Clin
Psychiatry. 2008;10:376.

CHAPTER 8

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Thorax and Lungs

333

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 8-3 Cough and Hemoptysis
Problem

Cough and Sputum

Associated Symptoms and Setting

Dry cough, may become productive of
variable amounts of sputum

Acute fairly minor illness with hoarseness. Often associated
with viral rhinosinusitis.

Acute Bronchitis

Cough, may be dry or productive

Acute, often viral, illness generally without fever or
dyspnea; at times with burning retrosternal discomfort.

Mycoplasma and
Viral Pneumonias

Dry hacking cough, may become
productive of mucoid sputum

Acute febrile illness, often with malaise, headache, and
possibly dyspnea.

Bacterial
Pneumonias

Sputum is mucoid or purulent; may be
blood-streaked, diffusely pinkish, or
rusty

Acute illness with chills, often high fever, dyspnea, and
chest pain. Commonly from Streptococcus pneumonia,
Haemophilus inﬂuenza, Moraxella catarrhalis; Klebsiella in
alcoholism, especially if underlying smoking, chronic
bronchitis and COPD, cardiovascular disease, diabetes.

Acute Inﬂammation
Laryngitis

Chronic Inﬂammation
Chronic cough; sputum mucoid or
Postnasal Drip
mucopurulent

Postnasal discharge may be seen in posterior pharynx.
Associated with allergic rhinitis, with or without sinusitis.

Chronic Bronchitis

Chronic cough; sputum mucoid to purulent,
may be blood-streaked or even bloody

Often with recurrent wheezing and dyspnea, and
prolonged history of tobacco abuse.

Bronchiectasis

Chronic cough; sputum purulent, often
copious and foul-smelling; may be bloodstreaked or bloody

Recurrent bronchopulmonary infections common; sinusitis
may coexist.

Pulmonary
Tuberculosis

Cough, dry or with mucoid or purulent
sputum; may be blood-streaked or bloody

Early, no symptoms. Later, anorexia, weight loss, fatigue,
fever, and night sweats.

Lung Abscess

Sputum purulent and foul-smelling; may
be bloody

Usually from aspiration pneumonia with fever and
infection from oral anaerobes and poor dental hygiene;
often with dysphagia or episode of impaired consciousness.

Asthma

Cough, at times with thick mucoid
sputum, especially near end of an attack

Episodic wheezing and dyspnea, but cough may occur
alone. Often with a history of allergies.

Gastroesophageal
Reﬂux

Chronic cough, especially at night or early
in the morning

Wheezing, especially at night (often mistaken for asthma),
early morning hoarseness, and repeated attempts to clear
the throat. Often with heartburn and regurgitation.

Cough, dry to productive; sputum may be
blood-streaked or bloody

Commonly with dyspnea, weight loss, and history of
tobacco abuse.

Neoplasm
Lung Cancer

Cardiovascular Disorders
Often dry, especially on exertion or at night;
Left Ventricular
may progress to the pink frothy sputum of
Failure or Mitral
pulmonary edema or to frank hemoptysis
Stenosis

Dyspnea, orthopnea, paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnea.

Pulmonary
Embolism

Dry cough, at times with hemoptysis

Tachypnea, chest or pleuritic pain, dyspnea, fever, syncope,
anxiety; factors that predispose to deep venous thrombosis.

Irritating Particles,
Chemicals, or Gases

Variable. There may be a latent period
between exposure and symptoms.

Exposure to irritants. Eyes, nose, and throat may be
affected.

Sources: Irwin RS, Madison JM. The diagnosis and treatment of cough. N Engl J Med. 2000;343:1715; Metlay JP, Kapoor WN, Fine MJ. Does this patient have
community-acquired pneumonia? Diagnosing pneumonia by history and physical examination. JAMA. 1997;378:1440; Neiderman M. In the clinic: communityacquired pneumonia. Ann Intern Med. 2009;151:ITC4–1; Barker A. Bronchiectasis. N Engl J Med. 2002;346:1383; Wenzel RP, Fowler AA. Acute bronchitis. N Engl J
Med. 2006;355:2125; Kerlin MP. In the clinic. Asthma. Ann Intern Med. 2014;160:ITC3–1; Escalante P. In the clinic: tuberculosis. Ann Intern Med. 2009;150:ITC6–
1; Agnelli G, Becattini C. Acute pulmonary embolism. N Engl J Med. 2010;363:266.

334

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 8-4 Abnormalities in Rate and Rhythm of Breathing
When observing respiratory patterns, note the rate, depth, and regularity of the patient’s breathing. Traditional terms, such as
tachypnea, are given below so that you will understand them, but simple descriptions are recommended.
Sighs
Inspiration

Expiration

Normal
The respiratory rate is about 14–20 per
min in normal adults and up to 44 per min
in infants.

Slow Breathing (Bradypnea)
Slow breathing with or without an
increase in tidal volume that maintains
alveolar ventilation. Abnormal alveolar
hypoventilation without increased tidal
volume can arise from uremia, druginduced respiratory depression, and
increased intracranial pressure.

Sighing Respiration
Breathing punctuated by frequent
sighs suggests hyperventilation
syndrome—a common cause of
dyspnea and dizziness. Occasional
sighs are normal.

Prolonged expiration
Hyperpnea

Apnea

Rapid Shallow Breathing
(Tachypnea)
Rapid shallow breathing has numerous
causes, including salicylate intoxication,
restrictive lung disease, pleuritic chest
pain, and an elevated diaphragm.

Cheyne–Stokes Breathing
Periods of deep breathing alternate with
periods of apnea (no breathing). This
pattern is normal in children and older
adults during sleep. Causes include heart
failure, uremia, drug-induced respiratory
depression, and brain injury (typically
bihemispheric).

Rapid Deep Breathing (Hyperpnea,
Hyperventilation)
In hyperpnea, rapid deep breathing occurs
in response to metabolic demand from
causes such as exercise, high altitude,
sepsis, and anemia. In hyperventilation, this
pattern is independent of metabolic
demand, except in respiratory acidosis.
Light-headedness and tingling may arise
from decreased CO2 concentration. In the
comatose patient, consider hypoxia, or
hypoglycemia affecting the midbrain or
pons. Kussmaul breathing is compensatory
overbreathing due to systemic acidosis. The
breathing rate may be fast, normal, or slow.

Ataxic Breathing (Biot Breathing)
Breathing is irregular—periods of apnea
alternate with regular deep breaths
which stop suddenly for short intervals.
Causes include meningitis, respiratory
depression, and brain injury, typically at
the medullary level.

Obstructive Breathing
In obstructive lung disease,
expiration is prolonged due to
narrowed airways increase the
resistance to air ﬂow. Causes include
asthma, chronic bronchitis, and
COPD.

CHAPTER 8

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Thorax and Lungs

335

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 8-5 Deformities of the Thorax

Normal Adult
The lateral diameter of the thorax in the normal adult is greater
than its AP diameter. The ratio of its AP diameter to the lateral
diameter is normally ∼0.7 up to 0.9 and increases with aging.43

Funnel Chest (Pectus Excavatum)
Note depression in the lower portion of the sternum.
Compression of the heart and great vessels may cause
murmurs.

Anteriorly
displaced sternum

Depressed
costal cartilages

Barrel Chest
There is an increased AP diameter. This shape is normal during
infancy, and often accompanies aging and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease.

Pigeon Chest (Pectus Carinatum)
The sternum is displaced anteriorly, increasing the AP
diameter. The costal cartilages adjacent to the protruding
sternum are depressed.

Spinal convexity to the right
(patient bending forward)

Ribs
widely
separated

Expiration
Inspiration

Traumatic Flail Chest
Multiple rib fractures may result in paradoxical movements of
the thorax. As descent of the diaphragm decreases intrathoracic
pressure, on inspiration, the injured area caves inward; on
expiration, it moves outward.

336

Ribs close
together

Thoracic Kyphoscoliosis
Abnormal spinal curvatures and vertebral rotation deform the
chest. Distortion of the underlying lungs may make
interpretation of lung ﬁndings very difﬁcult.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 8-6 Normal and Altered Breath and Voice Sounds
The origins of breath sounds continue to be investigated.47 Acoustic studies indicate that turbulent air ﬂow in the pharynx,
glottis, and subglottic region produce tracheal breath sounds, which are similar to bronchial sounds. The inspiratory component
of vesicular breath sounds seems to arise in the lobar and segmental airways; the expiratory component arises in the more
central larger airways. Normally, tracheal and bronchial sounds may be heard over the trachea and mainstem bronchi; vesicular
breath sounds predominate throughout most of the lungs. When lung tissue loses airﬂow, there is increased transmission of
high-pitched sounds. If the tracheobronchial tree is open, bronchial breath sounds may replace the normal vesicular sounds over
airless areas of the lung. This change occurs in lobar pneumonia when the alveoli get ﬁlled with ﬂuid and cellular debris—a
process called consolidation. Other causes include pulmonary edema or, rarely, hemorrhage. Bronchial breath sounds usually
correlate with an increase in tactile fremitus and transmitted voice sounds. These ﬁndings are summarized below.

Normal Air-Filled Lung

Consolidated Airless Lung (Lobar
Pneumonia)

Breath Sounds

Predominantly vesicular

Bronchial or bronchovesicular over the involved
area

Transmitted Voice
Sounds

Spoken words mufﬂed and indistinct
Spoken “ee” heard as “ee”
Whispered words faint and indistinct, if heard
at all

Spoken “ee” heard as “ay” (egophony)
Spoken words louder (bronchophony)
Whispered words louder, clearer (whispered
pectoriloquy)

Tactile Fremitus

Normal

Increased

NOTE: In the hyperinﬂated lung of COPD,
breath sounds are decreased (mufﬂed to distant)
to absent and transmitted voice sounds and
fremitus are decreased.

NOTE: In the dull lung of pleural effusion, breath
sounds are decreased to absent (bronchial sounds
possible at upper margin of effusion). Transmitted
voice sounds are decreased to absent (but may be
increased at upper margin of effusion). Fremitus
is decreased.

CHAPTER 8

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Thorax and Lungs

337

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 8-7 Adventitious
(Added) Lung Sounds:
Causes and Qualities

Sound

Causes and Qualities

Crackles

Crackles are discontinuous nonmusical sounds that can be early inspiratory (as in
COPD), late inspiratory (as in pulmonary ﬁbrosis), or biphasic (as in pneumonia). They are
currently considered to result from a series of tiny explosions when small distal airways,
deﬂated during expiration, pop open during inspiration. With few exceptions, recent
acoustic studies indicate that the role of secretions as a cause of crackles is less likely.47,48
Fine crackles are softer, higher pitched, and more frequent per breath than coarse
crackles. They are heard from mid to late inspiration, especially in the dependent areas of
the lung, and change according to body position. They have a shorter duration and
higher frequency than coarse crackles. Fine crackles appear to be generated by the
“sudden inspiratory opening of small airways held closed by surface forces during the
previous expiration.”47
Examples include pulmonary ﬁbrosis (known for “Velcro rales”) and interstitial lung
diseases such as interstitial ﬁbrosis and interstitial pneumonitis.
Coarse crackles appear in early inspiration and last throughout expiration (biphasic), have
a popping sound, are heard over any lung region, and do not vary with body position.
They have a longer duration and lower frequency than ﬁne crackles, change or disappear
with coughing, and are transmitted to the mouth. Coarse crackles appear to result from
“boluses of gas passing through airways as they open and close intermittently.”47
Examples include COPD, asthma, bronchiectasis, pneumonia (crackles may become ﬁner
and change from mid to late inspiratory during recovery), and heart failure.

Wheezes and Rhonchi

Wheezes are continuous musical sounds that occur during rapid airﬂow when bronchial
airways are narrowed almost to the point of closure. Wheezes can be inspiratory,
expiratory, or biphasic. They may be localized, due to a foreign body, mucous plug, or
tumor, or heard throughout the lung. Although wheezes are typical of asthma, they can
occur in a number of pulmonary diseases. Recent studies suggest that as the airways
become more narrowed, wheezes become less audible, culminating ﬁnally in “the silent
chest” of severe asthma requiring immediate intervention.
Rhonchi are considered by some to be a variant of wheezes, arising from the same
mechanism, but lower in pitch. Unlike wheezes, rhonchi may disappear with coughing,
so secretions may be involved.47

Stridor

Stridor is a continuous, high-frequency, high-pitched musical sound produced during
airﬂow through a narrowing in the upper respiratory tract. Stridor is best heard over the
neck during inspiration, but can be biphasic. Causes of the underlying airway obstruction
include tracheal stenosis from intubation, airway edema after device removal, epiglottitis,
foreign body, and anaphylaxis. Immediate intervention is warranted.

Pleural Rub

A pleural rub is a discontinuous, low-frequency, grating sound that arises from
inﬂammation and roughening of the visceral pleura as it slides against the parietal pleura.
This nonmusical sound is biphasic, heard during inspiration and expiration, and often
best heard in the axilla and base of the lungs.

Mediastinal Crunch
(Hamman Sign)

A mediastinal crunch is a series of precordial crackles synchronous with the heartbeat,
not with respiration. Best heard in the left lateral position, it arises from air entry into the
mediastinum causing mediastinal emphysema (pneumomediastinum). It usually produces
severe central chest pain and may be spontaneous. It has been reported in cases of
tracheobronchial injury, blunt trauma, pulmonary disease, use of recreational drugs,
childbirth, and rapid ascent from scuba diving.63

Sources: Bohadana A, Izbicki G, Kraman SS. Fundamentals of lung auscultation. N Engl J Med. 2014;370:744; McGee S. Evidence-based Physical Diagnosis, 3rd ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Saunders, 2012; Loudon R, Murphy LH. Lungs sounds. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1994;130:663.

338

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

Table 8-8 Physical Findings in Selected Chest Disorders
The red boxes in this table provide a framework for the clinical assessment of common chest disorders. Start with the three
boxes under percussion. Note resonant, dull, and hyperresonant. Then move from each of these to other boxes that emphasize
some of the key differences among various conditions. The changes described vary with the extent and severity of the disorder.
Abnormalities deep in the chest usually produce fewer signs than superﬁcial ones, and may cause no signs at all. Use the table
for the direction of typical changes, not for absolute distinctions.

Condition

Tactile Fremitus
and Transmitted
Voice Sounds

Percussion
Note

Trachea

Breath Sounds

Adventitious
Sounds

Resonant

Midline

Vesicular, except perhaps bronchovesicular
and bronchial sounds
over the large bronchi
and trachea, respectively

None, except a
few transient
inspiratory
crackles at the
bases of the lungs

Normal

Resonant

Midline

Vesicular (normal)

Late inspiratory
crackles in the
dependent
portions of the
lungs; possibly
wheezes

Normal

Resonant

Midline

Vesicular (normal)

None; possible
scattered coarse
crackles in early
inspiration and
expiration; possible
wheezes or rhonchi

Normal

Dull over the
airless area

Midline

Bronchial over the
involved area

Late inspiratory
crackles over the
involved area

Increased over the involved area, with egophony, bronchophony, and
whispered pectoriloquy

Dull over the
airless area

May be shifted
toward involved
side

Usually absent when bron- None
chial plug persists. Exceptions include right upper
lobe atelectasis, where adjacent tracheal sounds
may be transmitted.

Dull to ﬂat
over the ﬂuid

Shifted toward
the unaffected
side in a large
effusion

Decreased to absent, but
bronchial breath
sounds may be heard
near top of large
effusion.

Normal
The tracheobronchial tree
and alveoli are open;
pleurae are thin and close
together; mobility of the
chest wall is unimpaired.

Left-Sided Heart
Failure
Increased pressure in the
pulmonary veins causes
congestion and interstitial
edema (around the
alveoli); bronchial mucosa
may become edematous.

Chronic Bronchitis
The bronchi are
chronically inﬂamed and
a productive cough is
present. Airway
obstruction may develop.

Lobar Pneumonia
(Consolidation)
Alveoli ﬁll with ﬂuid, as
in pneumonia

Partial Lobar
Obstruction
(Atelectasis)
When a plug (from
mucus or a foreign
object) obstructs
bronchial air ﬂow,
affected alveoli collapse
and become airless

Usually absent when the
bronchial plug persists.
In right upper lobe
atelectasis may be
increased.

Pleural Effusion
Fluid accumulates in the
pleural space and
separates air-ﬁlled lung
from the chest wall,
blocking the transmission
of breath sounds.

None, except a
possible pleural rub

Decreased to absent, but
may be increased toward
the top of a large
effusion

(continued)
CHAPTER 8

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Thorax and Lungs

339

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
Table 8-8 Physical
Findings in Selected Chest
Disorders (Continued )

Condition

Breath Sounds

Adventitious
Sounds

Tactile Fremitus
and Transmitted
Voice Sounds

Shifted toward
the unaffected
side if tension
pneumothorax

Decreased to absent
over the pleural air

None, except a
possible pleural rub

Decreased to absent over
the pleural air

Diffusely
hyperresonant

Midline

Decreased to absent,
with delayed
expiration

None, or the
crackles,
wheezes, and
rhonchi of
associated
chronic
bronchitis

Decreased

Resonant to
diffusely
hyperresonant

Midline

Often obscured by
wheezes

Wheezes,
possibly
crackles

Decreased

Percussion
Note

Trachea

Hyperresonant
or tympanitic
over the pleural
air

Pneumothorax
When air leaks into the
pleural space, usually
unilaterally, the lung
recoils away from the
chest wall. Pleural air
blocks transmission of
sound.

Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease
(COPD)
Slowly progressive
disorder in which the
distal air spaces enlarge
and lungs become
hyperinﬂated. Chronic
bronchitis may precede
or follow the
development of COPD.

Asthma
Widespread, usually
reversible, airﬂow
obstruction with
bronchial
hyperresponsiveness and
underlying inﬂammation.
During attacks, as air
ﬂow decreases lungs
hyperinﬂate.

340

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
REFERENCES

References
1. Huffman JC, Pollack MH, Stern TA. Panic disorder and chest pain:
mechanisms, morbidity, and management. Prim Care Companion J
Clin Psychiatry. 2002;4:54.
2. Demiryoguran NS, Karcioglu O, Topacoglu H, et al. Anxiety disorder in patients with non-speciﬁc chest pain in the emergency setting. Emerg Med J. 2006;23:99.
3. Katerndahl DA. Chest pain and its importance in patients with
panic disorder: an updated literature review. Prim Care Companion
J Clin Psychiatry. 2008;10:376.
4. McConaghy JR, Oza RS. Outpatient diagnosis of acute chest pain
in adults. Am Fam Physician. 2013;87:177.
5. Parshall MB, Schwartzstein RM, Adams L, et al; American Thoracic
Society Committee on Dyspnea. An ofﬁcial American Thoracic
Society statement: update on the mechanisms, assessment, and
management of dyspnea. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2012;185:435.
6. Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease. Global
strategy for the diagnosis, management, and prevention of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Updated 2015. Available at http://
www.goldcopd.org/uploads/users/files/GOLD_Report_2015_
Feb18.pdf. Accessed March 14, 2015.
7. Celli BR, Cote CG, Marin JM, et al. The body-mass index, airﬂow
obstruction, dyspnea, and exercise capacity index in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. N Engl J Med. 2004;350:1005.
8. Bestall JC, Paul EA, Garrod R, et al. Usefulness of the Medical
Research Council (MRC) dyspnoea scale as a measure of disability
in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Thorax.
1999;54:581.
9. Kerlin MP. In the clinic. Asthma. Ann Intern Med. 2014;160:
ITC3–1.
10. Benich JJ 3rd, Carek PJ. Evaluation of the patient with chronic
cough. Am Fam Physician. 2011;84:887.
11. Canning BJ, Chang AB, Bolser DC, et al. Anatomy and neurophysiology of cough: CHEST Guideline and Expert Panel report. Chest.
2014;146:1633.
12. Musher DM, Thorner AR. Community acquired pneumonia.
N Engl J Med. 2014;371:1619.
13. Wunderink RG, Waterer GW. Clinical practice. Communityacquired pneumonia. N Engl J Med. 2014;370:543.
14. Bel EH. Clinical practice. Mild asthma. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:549.
15. Braman SS. Chronic cough due to acute bronchitis: ACCP evidence-based clinical practice guidelines. Chest. 2006;129(1
Suppl):95S.
16. Novosad SA, Barker AF. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
and bronchiectasis. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2013;19:133.
17. Moulton BC, Barker AF. Pathogenesis of bronchiectasis. Clin Chest
Med. 2012;33:211.
18. Lara AR, Schwarz MI. Diffuse alveolar hemorrhage. Chest.
2010;137:1164.
19. Jordan AS, McSharry DG, Malhotra A. Adult obstructive sleep
apnoea. Lancet. 2014;383(9918):736.
20. Balanchandran JS, Patel SR. In the clinic: obstructive sleep apnea.
Ann Intern Med. 2014;161:ITC1.
21. Vital signs: current cigarette smoking among adults aged ≥18
years—United States, 2005–2010. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep.
2011;60(35):1207.
22. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Smoking and tobacco
use. Youth and tobacco Use 2014. Available at http://www.cdc.gov/

tobacco/data_statistics/fact_sheets/youth_data/tobacco_use./
Accessed January 29, 2015.
23. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. How Tobacco
Smoke Causes Disease: The Biology and Behavioral Basis for SmokingAttributable Disease: A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta, GA:
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Chronic Disease
Prevention and Health Promotion, Ofﬁce on Smoking and Health;
2010. Available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK53017/. Accessed January 29, 2015.
24. U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. Counseling and interventions
to prevent tobacco use and tobacco-caused disease in adults and
pregnant women: reafﬁrmation recommendation statement. Ann
Intern Med. 2009;150:551.
25. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Fact sheets. Health
effects of cigarette smoking. 2014. Available at http://www.cdc.
gov/tobacco/data_statistics/fact_sheets/health_effects/effects_cig_
smoking/index.htm. Accessed January 29, 2015.
26. Moyer VA. Primary care interventions to prevent tobacco use in
children and adolescents: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2013;159:552.
27. Rigotti NA. Strategies to help a smoker who is struggling to quit.
JAMA. 2012;308:1573.
28. Fiore MC, Baker TB. Clinical practice. Treating smokers in the
health care setting. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:1222.
29. Ranney L, Melvin C, Lux L, et al. Systematic review: smoking cessation intervention strategies for adults and adults in special populations. Ann Intern Med. 2006;145:845.
30. Norcross JC, Prochaska JO. Using the stages of change. Harv Ment
Health Lett. 2002;18:5.
31. Benowitz NL. Nicotine addiction. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:2295.
32. Stead LF, Lancaster T. Combined pharmacotherapy and behavioural interventions for smoking cessation. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev. 2012;10:CD008286.
33. Siegel R, Ma J, Zou Z, et al. Cancer statistics, 2014. CA Cancer J
Clin. 2014;64:9.
34. Howlader N, Noone AM, Krapcho M, et al. SEER Cancer Statistics
Review, 1975–2011. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute;
2014.
35. Aberle DR, Adams AM, Berg CD, et al. Reduced lung-cancer mortality with low-dose computed tomographic screening. N Engl J
Med. 2011;365:395.
36. Moyer VA. Screening for lung cancer: U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force recommendation statement. Ann Intern Med. 2014;160:330.
37. Wender R, Fontham ET, Barrera E Jr., et al. American Cancer Society lung cancer screening guidelines. CA Cancer J Clin. 2013;63:107.
38. Estimates of deaths associated with seasonal inﬂuenza—United
States, 1976–2007. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2010;59(33):
1057.
39. Grohskopf LA, Olsen SJ, Sokolow LZ, et al. Prevention and control
of seasonal inﬂuenza with vaccines: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP)—United
States, 2014–2015 inﬂuenza season. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly
Rep. 2014;63(32):691.
40. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Prevention and control of seasonal inﬂuenza with vaccines. Recommendations of the
Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices–United States,
2015–2016. Updated August 6, 2015. Available at http://www.cdc.
gov/ﬂu/professionals/acip/index.htm. Accessed November 13,
2015.

CHAPTER 8

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

| The Thorax and Lungs

341

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com
REFERENCES
41. Updated recommendations for prevention of invasive pneumococcal disease among adults using the 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine (PPSV23). MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep.
2010;59(34):1102.
42. Tomczyk S, Bennett NM, Stoecker C, et al. Use of 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine and 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine among adults aged >/ = 65 years: recommendations
of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP).
MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2014;63(37):822. See also Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention. Vaccine information statement. Pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine - What you need to
know; April 4, 2015. At http://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/vis/visstatements/ppv.pdf. Accessed November 13, 2015.
43. McGee S. Ch 26, Inspection of the Chest. In Evidence-based Physical
Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:233–234.
44. McGee S. Ch 27, Palpation and Percussion of the Chest. In Evidencebased Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders;
2012:240.
45. McGee S. Ch 27, Palpation and Percussion of the Chest. In EvidenceBased Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders;
2012:248.
46. Wong CL, Holroyd-Leduc J, Straus SE. Does this patient have a
pleural effusion? JAMA. 2009;301:309.
47. Bohadana A, Izbicki G, Kraman SS. Fundamentals of lung auscultation. N Engl J Med. 2014;370:744.
48. McGee S. Ch 28, Auscultation of the Lungs. In Evidence-Based Physical
Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:260.
49. Loudon R, Murphy LH. Lungs sounds. Am Rev Respir Dis.
1994;130:663.
50. Epler GR, Carrrington CB, Gaensler EA. Crackles (rales) in the
interstitial pulmonary diseases. Chest. 1978;73:333.
51. Nath AR, Capel LH. Inspiratory crackles and mechanical events of
breathing. Thorax. 1974;29:695.
52. Nath AR, Capel LH. Lung crackles in bronchiectasis. Thorax.
1980;35:694.

342

53. Littner M. In the clinic: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Ann Intern Med. 2011;154:ITC4–1.
54. Niewoehner DE. Clinical practice. Outpatient management of
severe COPD. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:1407.
55. Qaseem A, Wilt TJ, Weinberger SE, et al; American College of Physicians; American College of Chest Physicians; American Thoracic
Society; European Respiratory Society. Diagnosis and management
of stable chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a clinical practice
guideline update from the American College of Physicians, American College of Chest Physicians, American Thoracic Society, and
European Respiratory Society. Ann Intern Med. 2011;155:179.
56. Holleman DR, Simel DL. Does the clinical examination predict
airﬂow limitation? JAMA. 1995;273:63.
57. Straus SE, McAlister FA, Sackett DL, et al. The accuracy of patient
history, wheezing, and laryngeal measurements in diagnosing
obstructive airway disease. JAMA. 2000;283:1853.
58. Spruit MA, Singh SJ, Garvey C, et al; ATS/ERS Task Force on Pulmonary Rehabilitation. An ofﬁcial American Thoracic Society/
European Respiratory Society statement: key concepts and
advances in pulmonary rehabilitation. Am J Respir Crit Care Med.
2013;188:e13.
59. McGee S. Ch 30, Pneumonia. In Evidence-Based Physical Diagnosis.
3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:272.
60. American Thoracic Society Committee on Proﬁciency Standards
for Clinical Pulmonary Function Laboratories. ATS statement:
guidelines for the six-minute walk test. Am J Respir Crit Care Med.
2002;166:111.
61. Spruit MA, Watkins ML, Edwards LD, et al. Evaluation of COPD
longitudinally to identify predictive surrogate endpoints (ECLIPSE)
study investigators. Determinants of poor 6-min walking distance in
patients with COPD: the ECLIPSE cohort. Respir Med. 2010;104:849.
62. McGee S. Ch 29, Ancillary Tests. In Evidence-Based Physical Diagnosis. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; 2012:267–268.
63. Kouritas VK, Papagiannopoulos K. Pneumomediastinum. J Thorac
Dis. 2015;7(Suppl 1):S44.

BATES’ GUIDE TO PHYSICAL EXAMINATION AND HISTORY TAKING

http://medsouls4you.blogspot.com

